adly guile of old women." Rejoined I,
No, by Allah!" Then said she to me, "Be of good cheer and eyes
clear; the dead hath found Allah's grace, and the live shall be
in good case.  Thou art a handsome youth and I do not desire thee
but according to the ordinance of Allah and His Apostle (on whom
be salutation and salvation!).  Whatever thou requirest of money
and stuff, thou shalt have forthright without stint, and I will
not impose any toil on thee, no, never!, for there is with me
always bread baked hot and water in pot.  All I need of thee is
that thou do with me even as the cock doth." I asked "And what
doth the cock?" Upon this she laughed and clapped her hands and
fell over on her back for excess of merriment then she sat up and
smiled and said, "O light of my eyes, really dost thou not know
what cock's duty is?" "No, by Allah!" replied I, and she, "The
cock's duty is to eat and drink and tread.' I was abashed at her
words and asked, "Is that the cock's duty?  Yes, answered she;
"and all I ask of thee now is to gird thy loins and strengthen
thy will and futter thy best." Then she clapped her hands and
cried out, saying, "O my mother, bring forward those who are with
thee." And behold, in came the old woman accompanied by four
lawful witnesses, and carrying a veil of silk.  Then she lighted
four candles, whilst the witnesses saluted me and sat down; and
the girl veiled herself with the veil and deputed one of them to
execute the contract on her behalf.  So they wrote out the
marriage bond and she testified to have received the whole sum
settled upon her, both the half in advance and the half in
arrears; and that she was indebted to me in the sum of ten
thousand dirhams.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: When they wrote out the
marriage contract, she testified to having received the whole sum
settled upon her, the half in advance and the half in arrears and
that she was indebted to me in the sum of ten thousand dirhams. 
She paid the witnesses their wage and they withdrew whence they
came.  Thereupon she arose and cast off her clothes and stood in
a chemise of fine silk edged with gold lace, after which she took
off her trousers and seized my hand and led me up to the couch,
saying, "There is no sin in a lawful put in." She lay down on the
couch outspread upon her back; and, drawing me on to her breast,
heaved a sigh and followed it up with a wriggle by way of being
coy.  Then she pulled up the shift above her breasts, and when I
saw her in this pose, I could not withhold myself from thrusting
it into her, after I had sucked her lips, whilst she whimpered
and shammed shame and wept when no tears came, and then said she,
"O my beloved, do it, and do thy best!" Indeed the case reminded
me of his saying, who said,

"When I drew up her shift from the roof of her coynte, * I found
     it as strait* as my mind and my money:
So I drove it half-way, and she sighed a loud sigh * Quoth I,
     'Why this sigh?': 'For the rest of it, honey!'"

And she repeated, "O my beloved, let the finish be made for I am
thine handmaid.  My life on thee, up with it!  give it me, all of
it!  that I may take it in my hand and thrust it into my very
vitals!" And she ceased not to excite me with sobs and sighs and
amorous cries in the intervals of kissing and clasping until amid
our murmurs of pleasure we attained the supreme delight and the
term we had in sight.  We slept together till the morning, when I
would have gone out; but lo!  she came up to me, laughing, and
said, "So! So! thinkest thou that going into the Hammam is the
same as going out?[FN#534]  Dost thou deem me to be the like of
the daughter of Dalilah the Wily One?  Beware of such a thought,
for thou art my husband by contract and according to law.  If
thou be drunken return to thy right mind, and know that the house
wherein thou art openeth but one day in every year.  Go down and
look at the great door." So I arose and went down and found the
door locked and nailed up and returned and told her of the
locking and nailing.  "O Aziz," said she, "We have in this house
flour, grain, fruits and pomegranates; sugar, meat, sheep,
poultry and so forth enough for many years; and the door will not
be opened till after the lapse of a whole twelvemonth and well I
weet thou shalt not find thyself without this house till then."
Quoth I "There is no Majesty, and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" "And how can this harm thee,"
rejoined she; "seeing thou knowest cock's duty, whereof I told
thee?" Then she laughed and I laughed too, and I conformed to
what she said and abode with her, doing cock's duty and eating
and drinking and futtering for a year of full twelve months,
during which time she conceived by me, and I was blessed with a
babe by her.  On the New Year's day I heard the door opened and
behold, men came in with cakes and flour and sugar.  Upon this, I
would have gone out but my wife said, "Wait till supper tide and
go out even as thou camest in." So I waited till the hour of
night prayer and was about to go forth in fear and trembling,
when she stopped me, saying, "By Allah, I will not let thee go
until thou swear to come back this night before the closing of
the door." I agreed to this, and she swore me a solemn oath on
Blade and Book,[FN#535] and the oath of divorce to boot, that I
would return to her.  Then I left her and going straight to the
garden, found the door open as usual; where at I was angry and
said to myself, "I have been absent this whole year and come here
unawares and find the place open as of wont!  I wonder is the
damsel still here as before?  I needs must enter and see before I
go to my mother, more by reason that it is now nightfall." So I
entered the flower garden,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.




End of Vol. 2.

                       Volume 2 Footnotes

[FN#1] Supplementarily to note 2, p. 2, [FN#2 Vol 1]and note 2,
p. 14, [FN#21 Vol 1] vol. i., I may add that "Shahrázád," in the
Shams al-Loghat, is the P.N. of a King. L. Langlès (Les Voyages
de Sindibâd Le Marin et La Ruse des Femmes, first appended to
Savary's Grammar and reprinted 12 mot pp. 161 + 113, Imprimerie
Royale, Paris, M.D.CCC.XIV) explains it by Le cyprès, la beauté
de la ville; and he is followed by (A. de Biberstein) Kazimirski
(Ends el-Djelis Paris, Barrois, 1847). Ouseley (Orient. Collect.)
makes Shahrzád=town-born; and others an Arabisation of Chehr-ázád
(free of face, ingenuous of countenance) the petit nom of Queen
Humay, for whom see the Terminal Essay. The name of the sister,
whom the Fihrist converts into a Kahramánah, or nurse, vulgarly
written Dínár-zád, would= child of gold pieces, freed by gold
pieces, or one who has no need of gold pieces: Dínzád=child of
faith and Daynázád, proposed by Langlès, "free from debt (!)" I
have adopted Macnaghten's Dunyazad. "Shahryar," which Scott
hideously writes "Shier ear," is translated by the Shams, King of
the world, absolute monarch and the court of Anushir wan while
the Burhán-i-Káti'a renders it a King of Kings, and P.N. of a
town. Shahr-báz is also the P.N. of a town in Samarcand.

[FN#2] Arab. "Malik," here used as in our story-books: "Pompey
was a wise and powerful King" says the Gesta Romanorum. This King
is, as will appear, a Regent or Governor under Harun al-Rashid.
In the next tale he is Viceroy of Damascus, where he is also
called "Sultan."

[FN#3] The Bull Edit. gives the lines as follows:--- 

     The lance was his pen, and the hearts of his foes *
         His paper, and dipped he in blood for ink;
     Hence our sires entitled the spear Khattíyah, *
         Meaning that withal man shall write, I think.

The pun is in "Khattíyah" which may mean a writer (feminine) and
also a spear, from Khatt Hajar, a tract in the province
Al-Bahrayn (Persian Gulf), and Oman, where the best Indian
bamboos were landed and fashioned into lances. Imr al-Keys
(Mu'allakah v. 4.) sings of "our dark spears firmly wrought of
Khattiyan cane;" Al-Busírí of "the brown lances of Khatt;" also
see Lebid v. 50 and Hamásah pp. 26, 231, Antar notes the "Spears
of Khatt" and "Rudaynian lances." Rudaynah is said to have been
the wife of one Samhár, the Ferrara of lances; others make her
the wife of Al-Ka'azab and hold Sambár to be a town in Abyssinia
where the best weapons were manufactured The pen is the Calamus
or Kalam (reed cut for pen) of which the finest and hardest are
brought from Java: they require the least ribbing. The rhetorical
figure in the text is called Husn al-Ta'alíl, our aetiology; and
is as admirable to the Arabs as it appears silly to us.

[FN#4] "He loves folk" is high praise, meaning something more
than benevolence and beneficence.. Like charity it covers a host
of sins.

[FN#5] The sentence is euphuistic.

[FN#6] Arab. "Rubb"=syrup a word Europeanised by the "Rob
Laffecteur."

[FN#7] The Septentriones or four oxen and their wain.

[FN#8] The list fatally reminds us of "astronomy and the use of
the globes" . . . "Shakespeare and the musical glasses."

[FN#9] The octave occurs in Night xv. I quote Torrens (p. 360) by
way of variety.

[FN#10] A courteous formula of closing with the offer.

[FN#11] To express our "change of climate" Easterns say, "change
of water and air," water coming first.

[FN#12] "The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by
night" (Psalm cxxi. 6). Easterns still believe in the blighting
effect of the moon's rays, which the Northerners of Europe, who
view it under different conditions, are pleased to deny. I have
seen a hale and hearty Arab, after sitting an hour in the
moonlight, look like a man fresh from a sick bed; and I knew an
Englishman in India whose face was temporarily paralysed by
sleeping with it exposed to the moon.

[FN#13] The negroids and negroes of Zanzibar.

[FN#14] i.e. Why not make thy heart as soft as thy sides! The
converse of this was reported at Paris during the Empire, when a
man had by mistake pinched a very high personage: "Ah, Madame! if
your heart be as hard as (what he had pinched) I am a lost man."

[FN#15] "Na'íman" is said to one after bathing or head-shaving:
the proper reply, for in the East every sign of ceremony has its
countersign, is "Allah benefit thee!" (Pilgrimage i. 11, iii.
285; Lane M. E. chaps. viii.; Caussin de Perceval's Arabic
Grammar, etc., etc.) I have given a specimen (Pilgrimage i., 122)
not only of sign and countersign, but also of the rhyming
repartee which rakes love. Hanien ! (pleasant to thee! said when
a man drinks). Allah pleasure thee (Allah yuhanník which Arnauts
and other ruffians perverted to Allah yaník, Allah copulate with
thee); thou drinkest for ten! I am the cock and thou art the hen!
(i.e. a passive catamite) Nay, I am the thick one (the penis
which gives pleasure) and thou art the thin! And so forth with
most unpleasant pleasantries.

[FN#16] In the old version she is called "The Fair Persian,"
probably from the owner: her name means "The Cheerer of the
Companion."

[FN#17] Pronounce "Nooraddeen." I give the name written in
Arabic.

[FN#18] Amongst Moslems, I have said, it is held highly
disgraceful when the sound of women's cries can be heard by
outsiders.

[FN#19] In a case like this, the father would be justified by
Rasm (or usage) not by Koranic law, in playing Brutus with his
son. The same would be the case in a detected intrigue with a
paternal concubine and, in very strict houses, with a slave-girl.

[FN#20] Orientals fear the "Zug" or draught as much as Germans;
and with even a better reason. Draughts are most dangerous in hot
climates.

[FN#21] The Unity of the Godhead and the Apostleship of Mohammed.

[FN#22] This would be done only in the case of the very poor.

[FN#23] Prayers over the dead are not universal in Al-Islam; but
when they are recited they lack the "sijdah" or prostration.

[FN#24] Or, "Of the first and the last," i.e. Mohammed, who
claimed (and claimed justly) to be the "Seal" or head and end of
all Prophets and Prophecy. For note that whether the Arab be held
inspired or a mere imposter, no man making the same pretension
has moved the world since him. Mr. J. Smith the Mormon (to
mention one in a myriad) made a bold attempt and failed.

[FN#25] i.e. flatterers.

[FN#26] In one matter Moslems contrast strongly with Christians,
by most scrupulously following the example of their law-giver:
hence they are the model Conservatives. But (European)
Christendom is here, as in other things, curiously contradictory:
for instance, it still keeps a "Feast of the Circumcision," and
practically holds circumcision in horror. Eastern Christians,
however, have not wholly abolished it, and the Abyssinians, who
find it a useful hygenic precaution, still practise it. For
ulcers, syphilis and other venereals which are readily cured in
Egypt become dangerous in the Highlands of Ethiopia.

[FN#27] Arab. "Sabab," the orig. and material sense of the word;
hence "a cause," etc.

[FN#28] Thus he broke his promise to his father, and it is
insinuated that retribution came upon him.

[FN#29] "O Pilgrim" (Ya Hájj) is a polite address even to those
who have not pilgrimaged. The feminine "Hájjah" (in Egypt
pronounced "Hággeh") is similarly used.

[FN#30] Arab. "usúl"=roots, i.e. I have not forgotten my
business.

[FN#31] Moslems from Central and Western North Africa.
(Pilgrimage i. 261; iii. 7, etc); the "Jabarti" is the Moslem
Abyssinian.

[FN#32] This is a favourite bit of chaff and is to be lengthened
out almost indefinitely e.g. every brown thing is not civet nor
every shining thing a diamond; every black thing is not charcoal
nor every white chalk; every red thing is not a ruby nor every
yellow a topaz; every long-necked thing is not a camel, etc.,
etc., etc.

[FN#33] He gives him the name of his grandfather; a familiar
usage.

[FN#34] Arab. "Ma'janah," a place for making unbaked bricks
(Tob=Span. Adobe) with chaff and bruised or charred straw. The
use of this article in rainless lands dates from ages immemorial,
and formed the outer walls of the Egyptian temple.

[FN#35] Arab. "Barsh," a bit of round matting used by the poor as
a seat. The Wazir thus showed that he had been degraded to the
condition of a mat-maker.

[FN#36] The growth (a Poa of two species) which named Wady Halfá
(vulg. "Halfah"), of which the home public has of late heard
perhaps a trifle too much. Burckhardt (Prov. 226) renders it "dry
reeds"-incorrectly enough.

[FN#37] This "Háshimi" vein, as they call it, was an abnormal
development between the eyes of the house of Abbas, inherited
from the great- grandfather of the Prophet; and the latter had it
remarkably large, swelling in answer and battle-rage. The text,
however, may read "The sweat of wrath," etc.

[FN#38] Torrens and Payne prefer "Ilm"=knowledge. Lane has more
correctly "Alam"=a sign, a flag.

[FN#39] The lines were in Night xi.: I have quoted Torrens (p.
379) for a change.

[FN#40] Still customary in Tigris-Euphrates land, where sea-craft
has not changed since the days of Xisisthrus-Noah, and long
before.

[FN#41] To cool the contents.

[FN#42] Hence the Khedivial Palace near Cairo "Kasr al-Nuzhah;"
literally, "of Delights;" one of those flimsy new-Cairo buildings
which contrast so marvellously with the architecture of ancient
and even of mediæval Egypt, and which are covering the land with
modern ruins. Compare Mohammed Ali's mosque in the citadel with
the older Sultan Hasan. A popular tale is told that, when the
conquering Turk, Yáwúz Sultan Selim, first visited Cairo, they
led him to Mosque Al-Ghúrí. "This is a splendid Ká'ah (saloon)!"
quoth he. When he entered Sultan Hasan, he exclaimed, "This is a
citadel!"; but after inspecting the Mosque Al-Mu'ayyad he cried,
"'Tis a veritable place of prayer, a fit stead for the Faithful
to adore the Eternal!"

[FN#43] Arab. gardeners are very touchy on this point. A friend
of mine was on a similar occasion addressed, in true Egyptian
lingo, by an old Adam-son, "Ya ibn al-Kalb! beta'mil ay?" (O dog-
son, what art thou up to?).

[FN#44] "The green palm-stick is of the trees of Paradise;" say
the Arabs in Solomonic style but not Solomonic words: so our
"Spare the rod," etc.

[FN#45] Wayfarers, travellers who have a claim on the kindness of
those at home: hence Abd al-Rahman al-Burai sings in his famous
Ode:--

 He hath claim on the dwellers in the places of their birth, *
Whoso wandereth the world, for he lacketh him a home.

It is given in my "First Footsteps in East Africa" (pp. 53-55).

[FN#46] The good old man treated the youth like a tired child.

[FN#47] In Moslem writings the dove and turtle-dove are mostly
feminine, whereas the female bird is always mute and only the
male sings to summon or to amuse his mate.

[FN#48] An unsavoury comparison of the classical Narcissus with
the yellow white of a nigger's eyes.

[FN#49] A tree whose coals burn with fierce heat: Al-Hariri (Vth
Seance). This Artemisia is like the tamarisk but a smaller growth
and is held to be a characteristic of the Arabian Desert. A
Badawi always hails with pleasure the first sight of the Ghazá,
after he has sojourned for a time away from his wilds. Mr.
Palgrave (i. 38) describes the "Ghadá" as an Euphorbia with a
woody stem often 5-6 feet high and slender, flexible green twigs
(?), "forming a feathery tuft, not ungraceful to the eye, while
it affords some shelter to the traveller, and food to his
camels."

[FN#50] Arab. "Sal'am"=S(alla) A(llah) a(layhi) was S(allam);
A(llah) b(less) h(im) a(nd) k(eep)=Allah keep him and assain!

[FN#51] The ass is held to be ill-omened. I have noticed the
braying elsewhere. According to Mandeville the Devil did not
enter the Ark with the Ass, but he left it when Noah said
"Benedicite." In his day (A.D. 1322) and in that of Benjamin of
Tudela, people had seen and touched the ship on Ararat, the Judi
(Gordiæi) mountains; and this dates from Berosus (S.C. 250) who,
of course, refers to the Ark of Xisisthrus. See Josephus Ant. i.
3, 6; and Rodwell (Koran, pp. 65, 530).

[FN#52] As would happen at a "Zikr," rogation or litany. Those
who wish to see how much can be made of the subject will read
"Pearls of the Faith, or Islam's Rosary, being the ninety-nine
beautiful names of Allah" (Asmá-el-Husna) etc. by Edwin Arnold:
London, Trübner, 1883.

[FN#53] i.e. the Sáki, cup-boy or cup-bearer. "Moon-faced," as I
have shown elsewhere, is no compliment in English, but it is in
Persian and Arabic.

[FN#54] He means we are "Záhirí," plain honest Moslems, not
"Bátiní," gnostics (ergo reprobates) and so forth, who disregard
all appearances and external ordinances. This suggests his
opinion of Shaykh Ibrahim and possibly refers to Ja'afar's
suspected heresy.

[FN#55] This worthy will be noticed in a subsequent page.

[FN#56] Arab. "Lisám," the end of the "Kufiyah," or head-kerchief
passed over the face under the eyes and made fast on the other
side. This mouth-veil serves as a mask (eyes not being
recognisable) and defends from heat, cold and thirst. I also
believe that hooding the eyes with this article, Badawi-fashion,
produces a sensation of coolness, at any rate a marked difference
of apparent temperature; somewhat like a pair of dark spectacles
or looking at the sea from a sandy shore. (Pilgrimage i., 210 and
346.) The woman's "Lisám" (chin-veil) or Yashmak is noticed in
i., 337. 

[FN#57] Most characteristic is this familiarity between the
greatest man then in the world and his pauper subject. The
fisherman alludes to a practise of Al-Islman, instituted by
Caliph Omar, that all rulers should work at some handicraft in
order to spare the public treasure. Hence Sultan Mu'ayyad of
Cairo was a calligrapher who sold his handwriting, and his
example was followed by the Turkish Sultans Mahmúd, Abd al-Majíd
and Abd al-Azíz. German royalties prefer carpentering and Louis
XVI, watch-making.

[FN#58] There would be nothing singular in this request. The
democracy of despotism levels all men outside the pale of
politics and religion.

[FN#59] "Wa'lláhi tayyib!" an exclamation characteristic of the
Egyptian Moslem.

[FN#60] The pretended fisherman's name Karím=the Generous.

[FN#61] Such an act of generosity would appear to Europeans well-
nigh insanity, but it is quite in Arab manners. Witness the oft-
quoted tale of Hatim and his horse. As a rule the Arab is the
reverse of generous, contrasting badly, in this point, with his
cousin the Jew: hence his ideal of generosity is of the very
highest. "The generous (i.e. liberal) is Allah's friend, aye,
though he be a sinner; and the miser is Allah's foe, aye, though
he be a saint!" Indian Moslems call a skin-flint Makhi-chús =
fly-sucker. (Pilgrimage i. 242.)

[FN#62] Arab. "Ammá ba'ad" or (Wa ba'ad), an initiatory formula
attributed to Koss ibn Sa'idat al-Iyadi, bishop of Najrán (the
town in Al-Yaman which D'Herbelot calls Negiran) and a famous
preacher in Mohammed's day, hence "more eloquent than Koss"
(Maydání, Arab. Prov., 189). He was the first who addressed
letters with the incept, "from A. to B."; and the first who
preached from a pulpit and who leant on a sword or a staff when
discoursing. Many Moslems date Ammá ba'ad from the Prophet David,
relying upon a passage of the Koran (xxxviii. 19).

[FN#63] Arab. "Nusf"=half (a dirham): vulgarly pronounced "nuss,"
and synonymous with the Egypt. "Faddah" (=silver), the Greek
"Asper," and the Turkish "paráh." It is the smallest Egyptian
coin, made of very base metal and, there being forty to the
piastre, it is worth nearly a quarter of a farthing.

[FN#64] The too literal Torrens and Lane make the Caliph give the
gardener-lad the clothes in which he was then clad, forgetting,
like the author or copier, that he wore the fisherman's lousy
suit.

[FN#65] In sign of confusion, disappointment and so forth: not
"biting his nails," which is European and utterly un-Asiatic.

[FN#66] See lines like these in Night xiii. (i. 136); the
sentiment is trite.

[FN#67] The Arab will still stand under his ruler's palace and
shout aloud to attract his attention. Sayyid Sa'íd known as the
"Imán of Muskat" used to encourage the patriarchal practice.
Mohammed repeatedly protested against such unceremonious conduct
(Koran xciv. 11, etc.). The "three times of privacy" (Koran cv.
57) are before the dawn prayer, during the Siesta (noon) and
after the even-prayer.

[FN#68] The Judges of the four orthodox schools.

[FN#69] That none might see it or find it ever after.

[FN#70] Arab. "Khatt Sharíf"=a royal autographical letter: the
term is still preserved in Turkey, but Europeans will write
"Hatt."

[FN#71] Meaning "Little tom-cat;" a dim. of "Kitt" vulg. Kutt or
Gutt.

[FN#72] Arab. "Matmúrah"-the Algerine "Matamor"-a "silo," made
familiar to England by the invention of "Ensilage."

[FN#73] The older "Mustapha"=Mohammed. This Intercession-doctrine
is fiercely disputed. (Pilgrimage ii. 77.) The Apostle of Al-
Islam seems to have been unable to make up his mind upon the
subject: and modern opinion amongst Moslems is apparently
borrowed from the Christians.

[FN#74] Lane (i. 486) curiously says, "The place of the
stagnation of blood:" yet he had translated the word aright in
the Introduction (i. 41). I have noticed that the Nat'a is made
like the "Sufrah," of well-tanned leather, with rings in the
periphery, so that a thong passed through turns it into a bag.
The Sufrah used for provisions is usually yellow, with a black
border and small pouches for knives or spoons. (Pilgrimage i.
111.)

[FN#75] This improbable detail shows the Caliph's greatness.

[FN#76] "Cousin" is here a term of familiarity, our "coz."

[FN#77] i.e. without allowing them a moment's delay to change
clothes.

[FN#78] i.e. according to my nature, birth, blood, de race.

[FN#79] Our "Job." The English translators of the Bible, who
borrowed Luther's system of transliteration (of A.D. 1522),
transferred into English the German "j" which has the sound of
"i" or "y"; intending us to pronounce Yacob (or Yakob), Yericho,
Yimnites, Yob (or Hiob) and Yudah. Tyndall, who copied Luther
(A.D. 1525-26), preserved the true sound by writing lacob, Ben
Iamin and Iudas. But his successors unfortunately returned to the
German; the initial I, having from the xiii century been
ornamentally lengthened and bent leftwards, became a consonant.
The public adopted the vernacular sound of "j" (da) and hence our
language and our literature are disgraced by such barbarisms as
"Jehovah" and "Jesus"; Dgehovah and Dgeesus for Yehovah and
Yesus. Future generations of school-teachers may remedy the evil;
meanwhile we are doomed for the rest of our days to hear 

  Gee-rusalem! Gee-rusalem! etc.

Nor is there one word to be said in favour of the corruption
except that, like the Protestant mispronunciation of Latin and
the Erasmian ill-articulation of Greek, it has become English,
and has lent its little aid in dividing the Britons from the rest
of the civilised world.

[FN#80] The moon, I repeat, is masculine in the so-called
"Semitic" tongues.

[FN#81] i.e. camel loads, about lbs. 300; and for long journeys
lbs. 250.

[FN#82] Arab. "Janázah," so called only when carrying a corpse;
else Na'ash, Sarír or Tábút: Irán being the large hearse on which
chiefs are borne. It is made of plank or stick work; but there
are several varieties. (Lane, M. E. chaps. xxviii.)

[FN#83] It is meritorious to accompany the funeral cortège of a
Moslem even for a few paces.

[FN#84] Otherwise he could not have joined in the prayers.

[FN#85] Arab. "Halwá" made of sugar, cream, almonds, etc. That of
Maskat is famous throughout the East.

[FN#86] i.e. "Camphor" to a negro, as we say "Snowball," by the
figure antiphrase.

[FN#87] "Little Good Luck," a dim. form of "bakht"=luck, a
Persian word naturalized in Egypt.

[FN#88] There are, as I have shown, not a few cannibal tribes in
Central Africa and these at times find their way into the slave
market.

[FN#89] i.e. After we bar the door.

[FN#90] Arab. "Jáwísh" from Turk. Cháwúsh, Chiaoosh, a sergeant,
poursuivant, royal messenger. I would suggest that this is the
word "Shálish" or "Jálish" in Al-Siynti's History of the Caliphs
(p. 501) translated by Carlyle "milites," by Schultens
"Sagittarius" and by Jarett "picked troops."

[FN#91] This familiarity with blackamoor slave-boys is common in
Egypt and often ends as in the story: Egyptian blood is
sufficiently mixed with negro to breed inclination for
miscegenation. But here the girl was wickedly neglected by her
mother at such an age as ten.

[FN#92] Arab. "Farj"; hence a facetious designation of the other
sex is "Zawi'l-furuj" (grammatically Zawátu'l- furúj)=habentes
rimam, slit ones.

[FN#93] This ancient and venerable practice of inspecting the
marriage-sheet is still religiously preserved in most parts of
the East, and in old-fashioned Moslem families. It is publicly
exposed in the Harem to prove that the "domestic calamity" (the
daughter) went to her husband a clean maid. Also the general idea
is that no blood will impose upon the exerts, or jury of matrons,
except that of a pigeon-poult which exactly resembles hymeneal
blood-- when not subjected to the microscope. This belief is
universal in Southern Europe and I have heard of it in England.
Further details will be given in Night ccxi.

[FN#94] "Agha" Turk.=sir, gentleman, is, I have said, politely
addressed to a eunuch.

[FN#95] As Bukhayt tells us he lost only his testes, consequently
his erectio et distensio penis was as that of a boy before
puberty and it would last as long as his heart and circulation
kept sound. Hence the eunuch who preserves his penis is much
prized in the Zenanah where some women prefer him to the entire
man, on account of his long performance of the deed of kind. Of
this more in a future page.

[FN#96] It is or rather was the custom in Egypt and Syria to
range long rows of fine China bowls along the shelves running
round the rooms at the height of six or seven feet, and they
formed a magnificent cornice. I bought many of them at Damascus
till the people, learning their value, asked prohibitive prices.

[FN#97] The tale is interesting as well as amusing, excellently
describing the extravagance still practiced in middle-class
Moslem families on the death of the pater familias. I must again
note that Arab women are much more unwilling to expose the back
of the head covered by the "Tarhah" (head-veil) than the face,
which is hidden by the "Burke" or nose bag.

[FN#98] The usual hysterical laughter of this nervous race.

[FN#99] Here the slave refuses to be set free and starve. For a
master so to do without ample reasons is held disgraceful. I well
remember the weeping and wailing throughout Sind when an order
from Sir Charles Napier set free the negroes whom British
philanthropy thus doomed to endure if not to die of hunger.

[FN#100] Manumission, which is founded upon Roman law, is an
extensive subject discussed in the Hidáyah and other canonical
works. The slave here lays down the law incorrectly but his claim
shows his truly "nigger" impudence.

[FN#101] This is quite true to nature. The most remarkable thing
in the wild central African is his enormous development of
"destructiveness." At Zanzibar I never saw a slave break a glass
or plate without a grin or a chuckle of satisfaction.

[FN#102] Arab. "Khassá-ni"; Khusyatáni (vulg.) being the
testicles, also called "bayzatán" the two eggs) a double entendre
which has given rise to many tales. For instance in the witty
Persian book "Dozd o Kazi" (The Thief and the Judge) a footpad
strips the man of learning and offers to return his clothes if he
can ask him a puzzle in law or religion. The Kazi (in folk-lore
mostly a fool) fails, and his wife bids him ask the man to supper
for a trial of wits on the same condition. She begins with
compliments and ends by producing five eggs which she would have
him distribute equally amongst the three; and, when he is
perplexed, she gives one to each of the men taking three for
herself. Whereupon the "Dozd" wends his way, having lost his
booty as his extreme stupidity deserved. In the text the eunuch,
Kafur, is made a "Sandal" or smooth-shaven, so that he was of no
use to women.

[FN#103] Arab. "Khara," the lowest possible word: Yá Khara! is
the commonest of insults, used also by modest women. I have heard
one say it to her son.

[FN#104] Arab. "Kámah," a measure of length, a fathom, also
called "Bá'a." Both are omitted in that sadly superficial book,
Lane's Modern Egyptians, App. B.

[FN#105] Names of her slave-girls which mean (in order),
Garden-bloom, Dawn (or Beautiful), Tree o' Pearl (P. N. of
Saladin's wife), Light of (right) Direction, Star o' the Morn
Lewdness (= Shahwah, I suppose this is a chaff), Delight,
Sweetmeat and Miss Pretty.

[FN#106] This mode of disposing of a rival was very common in
Harems. But it had its difficulties and on the whole the river
was (and is) preferred.

[FN#107] An Eastern dislikes nothing more than drinking in a dim
dingy place: the brightest lights seem to add to his
"drinkitite."

[FN#108] He did not sleep with her because he suspected some
palace-mystery which suggested prudence, she also had her
reasons.

[FN#109] This as called in Egypt "Allah." (Lane M. E. chaps. i.)

[FN#110] It would be a broad ribbon-like band upon which the
letters could be worked.

[FN#111] In the Arab. "he cried." These "Yes, Yes!" and "No! No!"
trifles are very common amongst the Arabs.

[FN#112] Arab. "Maragha" lit. rubbed his face on them like a
fawning dog. Ghanim is another "softy" lover, a favourite
character in Arab tales; and by way of contrast, the girl is
masterful enough.

[FN#113] Because the Abbaside Caliphs descend from Al-Abbas,
paternal uncle of Mohammed, text means more explicitly, "O
descendant of the Prophet's uncle!"

[FN#114] The most terrible part of a belle passion in the East is
that the beloved will not allow her lover leave of absence for an
hour.

[FN#115] It is hard to preserve these wretched puns. In the
original we have "O spray (or branch) of capparis-shrub (aráki)
which has been thinned of leaf and fruit (tujna, i.e., whose
fruit, the hymen, has been plucked before and not by me) I see
thee (aráka) against me sinning (tajní).

[FN#116] Apparently the writer forgets that the Abbaside banners
and dress were black, originally a badge of mourning for the Imám
Ibrahim bin Mohammed put to death by the Ommiade Caliph
Al-Marwan. The modern Egyptian mourning, like the old Persian, is
indigo-blue of the darkest; but, as before noted, the custom is
by no means universal.

[FN#117] Koran, chaps. iv. In the East as elsewhere the Devil
quotes Scripture.

[FN#118] A servant returning from a journey shows his master due
honour by appearing before him in travelling suit and uncleaned.

[FN#119] The first name means "Rattan", the second "Willow wand,"
from the "Bán" or "Khiláf" the Egyptian willow (Salix Ægyptiaca
Linn.) vulgarly called "Safsáf." Forskal holds the "Bán" to be a
different variety.

[FN#120] Arab. "Ta'ám," which has many meanings: in mod. parlance
it would signify millet holcus seed.

[FN#121] i.e. "I well know how to deal with him."

[FN#122] The Pen (title of the Koranic chaps. Ixviii.) and the
Preserved Tablet (before explained).

[FN#123] These plunderings were sanctioned by custom. But a few
years ago, when the Turkish soldiers mutinied about arrears of
pay (often delayed for years) the governing Pasha would set fire
to the town and allow the men to loot what they pleased during a
stated time. Rochet (soi-disant D'Hericourt) amusingly describes
this manoeuvre of the Turkish Governor of Al-Hodaydah in the last
generation. (Pilgrimage iii. 381.)

[FN#124] Another cenotaph whose use was to enable women to
indulge in their pet pastime of weeping and wailing in company.

[FN#125] The lodging of pauper travellers, as the chapel in
Iceland is of the wealthy. I have often taken benefit of the
mosque, but as a rule it is unpleasant, the matting being not
only torn but over-populous. Juvenal seems to allude to the
Jewish Synagogue similarly used: "in quâ te quæro proseuchâ"?
(iii. 296) and in Acts iii. we find the lame, blind and impotent
in the Temple-porch.

[FN#126] This foul sort of vermin is supposed to be bred by
perspiration. It is an epoch in the civilised traveller's life
when he catches his first louse.

[FN#127] The Moslem peasant is a kind hearted man and will make
many sacrifices for a sick stranger even of another creed. It is
a manner of "pundonor" with the village.

[FN#128] Such treatment of innocent women was only too common
under the Caliphate and in contemporary Europe.

[FN#129] This may also mean, "And Heaven will reward thee," but
camel-men do not usually accept any drafts upon futurity.

[FN#130] He felt that he was being treated like a corpse.

[FN#131] This hatred of the Hospital extends throughout Southern
Europe, even in places where it is not justified.

[FN#132] The importance of the pillow (wisádah or makhaddah) to
the sick man is often recognised in The Nights. "He took to his
pillow" is = took to his bed.

[FN#133] i.e in order that the reverend men, who do not render
such suit and service gratis, might pray for him.

[FN#134] The reader will notice in The Nights the frequent
mention of these physical prognostications, with which mesmerists
are familiar.

[FN#135] The Pers. name of the planet Saturn in the Seventh
Heaven. Arab. "Zuhal"; the Kiun or Chiun of Amos vi. 26.

[FN#136] i.e. "Pardon me if I injured thee"-- a popular phrase.

[FN#137] A "seduction," a charmer. The double-entendre has before
been noticed.

[FN#138] This knightly tale, the longest in the Nights (xliv.--
cxlv.), about one-eighth of the whole, does not appear in the
Bres. Edit. Lane, who finds it "objectionable," reduces it to two
of its episodes, Azíz-cum-Azízah and Táj al-Mulúk. On the other
hand it has been converted into a volume (8vo, pp. 240)
"Scharkan, Conte Arabe," etc. Traduit par M. Asselan Riche, etc.
Paris: Dondey-Dupré. 1829. It has its longueurs and at times is
longsome enough; but it is interesting as a comparison between
the chivalry of Al-Islam and European knight-errantry. Although
all the characters are fictitious the period is evidently in the
early crusading days. Cæsarea, the second capital of Palestine,
taken during the Caliphate of Omar (A.H. 19) and afterwards
recovered, was fortified in A.H. 353 = 963 as a base against the
Arabs by the Emperor Phocas, the Arab. "Nakfúr" i.e. Nicephorus.
In A.H. 498=1104, crusading craft did much injury by plundering
merchantmen between Egypt and Syria, to which allusion is found
in the romance. But the story teller has not quite made up his
mind about which Cæsarea he is talking, and M. Riche tells us
that Césarée is a "ville de la Mauritanie, en Afrique" (p. 20).

[FN#139] The fifth Ommiade Caliph reign. A.H. 65-86 = 685-704.

[FN#140] This does not merely mean that no one was safe from his
wrath: or, could approach him in the heat of fight: it is a
reminiscence of the masterful "King Kulayb," who established
game-laws in his dominions and would allow no man to approach his
camp-fire. Moreover the Jinn lights a fire to decoy travellers,
but if his victim be bold enough to brave him, he invites him to
take advantage of the heat.

[FN#141] China.

[FN#142] The Jaxartes and the Bactrus (names very loosely
applied).

[FN#143] In full "Sharrun kána" i.e. an evil (Sharr) has come to
being (kána) that is, "bane to the foe" a pagan and knightly
name. The hero of the Romance "Al-Dalhamah" is described as a
bitter gourd (colocynth), a viper, a calamity.

[FN#144] This is a Moslem law (Koran chaps. iv. bodily borrowed
from the Talmud) which does not allow a man to marry one wife
unless he can carnally satisfy her. Moreover he must distribute his
honours equally and each wife has a right to her night unless she
herself give it up. This was the case even with the spouses of the
Prophet; and his biography notices several occasions when his wives
waived their rights in favour of one another M. Riche kindly
provides the King with la piquante francaise (p. 15).

[FN#145] So the celebrated mosque in Stambul, famed for being the
largest church in the world is known to the Greeks as "Agia (pron.
Aya) Sophia" and to Moslems as "Aye Sofíyeh" (Holy Wisdom) i.e. the
Logos or Second Person of the Trinity (not a Saintess). The sending
a Christian girl as a present to a Moslem would, in these days, be
considered highly scandalous. But it was done by the Mukaukis or
Coptic Governor of Egypt (under Heraclius) who of course hated the
Greeks. This worthy gave two damsels to Mohammed; one called Sírín
and the other Máriyah (Maria) whom the Prophet reserved for his
especial use and whose abode is still shown at Al-Medinah. The Rev.
Doctor Badger (loc. cit. p. 972) gives the translation of an
epistle by Mohammed to this Mukaukis, written in the Cufic
character ( ? ?) and sealed "Mohammed, The Apostle of Allah." My
friend seems to believe that it is an original, but upon this
subject opinions will differ. It is, however, exceedingly
interesting, beginning with "Bismillah," etc., and ending (before
the signature) with a quotation from the Koran (iii. 57); and it
may be assumed as a formula addressee to foreign potentates by a
Prophet who had become virtually "King of Arabia."

[FN#146] This prayer before "doing the deed of kind" is, I have
said, Moslem as well Christian.

[FN#147] Exodus i. 16, quoted by Lane (M. E., chaps. xxvii.).
Torrens in his Notes cites Drayton's "Moon-calf':--

    Bring forth the birth-stool--no, let it alone;
    She is so far beyond all compass grown,
    Some other new device us needs must stead,
    Or else she never can be brought to bed.

It is the "groaning-chair" of Poor Robin's Almanac (1676) and we
find it alluded to in Boccaccio, the classical sedile which
according to scoffers has formed the papal chair (a curule seat)
ever since the days of Pope Joan, when it has been held advisable
for one of the Cardinals to ascertain that His Holiness possesses
all the instruments of virility. This "Kursí al-wiládah" is of
peculiar form on which the patient is seated. A most interesting
essay might be written upon the various positions preferred during
delivery, e.g. the wild Irish still stand on all fours, like the
so-called "lower animals." Amongst the Moslems of Waday, etc., a
cord is hung from the top of the hut, and the woman in labour holds
on to it standing with her legs apart, till the midwife receives
the child.

[FN#148] Some Orientalists call "lullilooing" the trilling cry,
which is made by raising the voice to its highest pitch and
breaking it by a rapid succession of touches on the palate with the
tongue-tip, others "Ziraleet" and Zagaleet, and one traveller tells
us that it began at the marriage-festival of Isaac and Rebecca (!).
Arabs term it classically "Tahlíl" and vulgarly "Zaghrutah" (Plur.
Zaghárit) and Persians "Kil." Finally in Don Quixote we have
"Lelilies," the battle-cry of the Moors (Duffield iii. 289). Dr.
Buchanan likens it to a serpent uttering human sounds, but the good
missionary heard it at the festival of Jagannath. (Pilgrimage iii.
197 )

[FN#149] i.e. "Light of the Place" (or kingdom) and "Delight of the
Age."

[FN#150] It is utterly absurd to give the old heroic Persian name
Afridun or Furaydun, the destroyer of Zohák or Zahhák to a Greek,
but such anachronisms are characteristic of The Nights and are
evidently introduced on purpose. See Boccaccio, ix. 9.

[FN#151] Arab. "Yunán" lit. Ionia, which applies to all Greece,
insular and continental, especially to ancient Greece.

[FN#152] In 1870 I saw at Sidon a find of some hundreds of gold
"Philippi" and "Alexanders."

[FN#153] M. Riche has (p. 21), "Ces talismans travaillés par le
ciseau du célèbre Califaziri," adding in a note, "Je pense que
c'est un sculpteur Arabe."

[FN#154] This periphrase, containing what seems to us a useless
negative, adds emphasis in Arabic.

[FN#155] This bit of geographical information is not in the Bull
Edit.

[FN#156] In Pers. = a tooth, the popular word.

[FN#157] This preliminary move, called in Persian Nakl-i Safar, is
generally mentioned. So the Franciscan monks in California, when
setting out for a long journey through the desert, marched three
times round the convent and pitched tents for the night under its
walls.

[FN#158] In Arab. "Khazinah" or "Khaznah" lit. a treasure,
representing 1,000 "Kís" or purses (each=£5). The sum in the text
is 7,000 purses X 5=£35,000.

[FN#159] Travellers often prefer such sites because they are
sheltered from the wind, and the ground is soft for pitching tents;
but many have come to grief from sudden torrents following rain.

[FN#160] Arab "Ghábah" not a forest in our sense of the word, but
a place where water sinks and the trees (mostly Mimosas), which
elsewhere are widely scattered, form a comparatively dense growth
and collect in thickets. These are favourite places for wild beasts
during noon-heats.

[FN#161] At various times in the East Jews and Christians were
ordered to wear characteristic garments, especially the Zunnár or
girdle.

[FN#162] The description is borrowed from the Coptic Convent, which
invariably has an inner donjon or keep. The oldest monastery in the
world is Mar Antonios (St. Anthony the Hermit) not far from Suez.
(Gold Mines of Midian, p. 85.)

[FN#163] "Dawáhí," plur. of Dáhiyah = a mishap. The title means
"Mistress of Misfortunes" or Queen of Calamities (to the enemy);
and the venerable lady, as will be seen, amply deserved her name,
which is pronounced Zát al-Dawáhí.

[FN#164] Arab. "Kunfuz"=hedgehog or porcupine.

[FN#165] These flowers of speech are mere familiarities, not
insults. In societies where the sexes are separated speech becomes
exceedingly free. "Étourdie que vous êtes," says M. Riche, toning
down the text.

[FN#166] Arab. "Zirt," a low word. The superlative "Zarrát"
(fartermost) or, "Abu Zirt" (Father of farts) is a facetious term
among the bean-eating Fellahs and a deadly insult amongst the
Badawin (Night ccccx.). The latter prefer the word Taggáa
(Pilgrimage iii. 84). We did not disdain the word in
farthingale=pet en air.

[FN#167] Arab. "kicked" him, i.e. with the sharp corner of the
shovel-stirrup. I avoid such expressions as "spurring" and
"pricking over the plain," because apt to give a wrong idea.

[FN#168] Arab. "Allaho Akbar!" the classical Moslem slogan.

[FN#169] Arab horses are never taught to leap, so she was quite
safe on the other side of a brook nine feet broad.

[FN#170] "Batrík" (vulg. Bitrík)=patricius, a title given to
Christian knights who commanded ten thousand men; the Tarkhan (or
Nobb) heading four thousand, and the Kaumas (Arab. Káid) two
hundred. It must not be confounded with Batrak (or
Batrik)=patriarcha. (Lane's Lex.)

[FN#171] Arab. "Kázi al-Kuzát," a kind of Chief Justice or
Chancellor. The office wag established under the rule of Harun al
Rashid, who so entitled Abú Yúsuf Ya'akab al-Ansári: therefore the
allusion is anachronistic. The same Caliph also caused the Olema to
dress as they do still.

[FN#172] The allusion is Koranic: "O men, if ye be in doubt
concerning the resurrection, consider that He first created you of
the dust of the ground (Adam), afterwards of seed" (chaps. xxii.).
But the physiological ideas of the Koran are curious. It supposes
that the Mani or male semen is in the loins and that of women in
the breast bone (chaps Ixxxvi.); that the mingled seed of the two
(chaps. Ixxvi.) fructifies the ovary and that the child is fed
through the navel with menstruous blood, hence the cessation of the
catamenia. Barzoi (Kalilah and Dímnah) says:-- "Man's seed, falling
into the woman's womb, is mixed with her seed and her blood: when
it thickens and curdles the Spirit moves it and it turns about like
liquid cheese; then it solidifies, its arteries are formed, its
limbs constructed and its joints distinguished. If the babe is a
male, his face is placed towards his mother's back; if a female,
towards her belly." (P. 262, Mr. L G.N. Keith- Falconer's
translation.) But there is a curious prolepsis of the
spermatozoa-theory. We read (Koran chaps. vii.), "Thy Lord drew
forth their posterity from the loins of the sons of Adam;" and the
commentators say that Allah stroked Adam's back and extracted from
his loins all his posterity, which shall ever be, in the shape of
small ants; these confessed their dependence on God and were
dismissed to return whence they came." From this fiction it appears
(says Sale) that the doctrine of pre-existence is not unknown to
the Mohammedans, and there is some little conformity between it and
the modern theory of generatio ex animalculis in semine marium. The
poets call this Yaum-i-Alast = the Day of Am-I-not (-your Lord)?
which Sir William Jones most unhappily translated "Art thou not
with thy Lord ?" (Alasta bi Rabbi- kum); fand they produce a grand
vision of unembodied spirits appearing in countless millions before
their Creator.

[FN#173] The usual preliminary of a wrestling bout.

[FN#174] In Eastern wrestling this counts as a fair fail. So Ajax
fell on his back with Ulysses on his breast. (Iliad xxxii., 700,
etc.)

[FN#175] So biting was allowed amongst the Greeks in the
            , the final struggle on the ground.

[FN#176] Supposed to be names of noted wrestlers. "Kayim" (not
El-Kim as Torrens has it) is a term now applied to a juggler or
"professor" of legerdemain who amuses people in the streets with
easy tricks. (Lane, M. E., chaps. xx.)

[FN#177] Lit. "laughed in his face" which has not the unpleasant
meaning it bears in English.

[FN#178] Arab. "Abu riyáh"=a kind of child's toy. It is our
"bull-roarer" well known in Australia and parts of Africa.

[FN#179] The people of the region south of the Caspian which is
called "Sea of Daylam." It has a long history; for which see
D'Herbelot, s.v. "Dilem."

[FN#180] Coptic convents in Egypt still affect these drawbridges
over the keep-moat.

[FN#181] Koran iv., xxii. etc., meaning it is lawful to marry women
taken in war after the necessary purification although their
husbands be still living. This is not permitted with a free woman
who is a True Believer. I have noted that the only concubine
slave-girl mentioned in the Koran are these "captives possessed by
the right hand."

[FN#182] The Amazonian dame is a favourite in folk-lore and is an
ornament to poetry from the Iliad to our modern day. Such heroines,
apparently unknown to the Pagan Arabs, were common in the early
ages of Al-Islam as Ockley and Gibbon prove, and that the race is
not extinct may be seen in my Pilgrimage (iii. 55) where the sister
of Ibn Rumi resolved to take blood revenge for her brother.

[FN#183] And Solomon said, "O nobles, which of you will bring me
her throne ?" A terrible genius (i.e. an If rit of the Jinn named
Dhakwan or the notorious Sakhr) said, " I will bring it unto thee
before thou arise from thy seat (of justice); for I am able to
perform it, and may be trusted" (Koran, xxvii. 38-39). Balkís or
Bilkís (says the Durrat al-Ghawwás) daughter of Hozád bin
Sharhabíl, twenty-second in the list of the rulers of Al- Yaman,
according to some murdered her husband, and became, by Moslem
ignorance, the Biblical " Queen of Sheba." The Abyssinians transfer
her from Arabian Saba to Ethiopia and make her the mother by
Solomon of Menelek, their proto-monarch; thus claiming for their
royalties an antiquity compared with which all reigning houses in
the world are of yesterday. The dates of the Tabábi'ah or Tobbas
prove that the Bilkis of history ruled Al-Yaman in the early
Christian era.

[FN#184] Arab. "Fass," fiss or fuss; the gem set in a ring; also
applied to a hillock rounded en cabochon. In The Nights it is used
to signify "a fine gem."

[FN#185] This prominence of the glutæi muscles is always insisted
upon, because it is supposed to promise well in a bed-fellow. In
Somali land where the people are sub- steatopygous, a rich young
man, who can afford such luxury, will have the girls drawn up in
line and choose her to wife who projects furthest behind

[FN#186] The "bull" is only half mine.

[FN#187] A favourite Arab phrase, the "hot eye" is one full of
tears.

[FN#188] i.e., "Coral," coral branch, a favourite name for a
slave-girl, especially a negress. It is the older "Morgiana." I do
not see why Preston in Al-Haríni's "Makamah (Séance) of Singar"
renders it pearls, because Golius gives "small pearls," when it is
evidently "coral." Richardson (Dissert. xlviii.) seems to me
justified in finding the Pari (fairy) Marjan of heroic Persian
history reflected in the Fairy Morgain who earned off King Arthur
after the battle of Camelon.

[FN#189] Arab. "'Ud Jalaki"=Jalak or Jalik being a poetical and
almost obsolete name of Damascus.

[FN#190] The fountain in Paradise whose water shall be drunk with
"pure" wine mixed and sealed with musk (for clay). It is so called
because it comes from the "Sanam" (Sanima, to be high) boss or
highest ridge of the Moslem Heaven (Koran lv. 78 and lxxxiii. 27).
Mr. Rodwell says "it is conveyed to the highest apartments in the
Pavilions of Paradise." (?)

[FN#191] This "hysterical" temperament is not rare even amongst the
bravest Arabs.

[FN#192] An idea evidently derived from the Æolipyla (olla
animatoria) the invention of Hero Alexandrinus, which showed that
the ancient Egyptians could apply the motive force of steam.

[FN#193] Kuthayyir ibn Abi Jumah, a poet and far-famed Ráwí or
Tale-reciter, mentioned by Ibn Khallikan he lived at Al-Medinah and
sang the attractions of one Azzah, hence his soubriquet Sáhib
(lover of) Azzah. As he died in A. H. 105 (=726), his presence here
is a gross anachronism the imaginary Sharrkan flourished before the
Caliphate of Abd al-Malik bin Marwán A. H. 65-86.

[FN#194] Jamíl bin Ma'amar, a poet and lover contemporary with
Al-Kuthayrir.

[FN#195] Arab. "Tafazzal," a word of frequent use in
conversation="favour me," etc.

[FN#196] The word has a long history. From the Gr.        or      
is the Lat. stibium; while the Low Latin "antimonium" and the Span.
Althimod are by metathesis for Al-Ithmid. The dictionaries define
the substance as a stone from which a