ntimony is prepared, but the
Arabs understand a semi-mythical mineral of yellow colour which
enters into the veins of the eyes and gives them Iynx-like vision.
The famous Anz nicknamed Zarká (the blue eyed) of Yamámah
(Province) used it; and, according to some, invented Kohl. When her
(protohistoric) tribe Jadis had destroyed all the rival race of
Tasm, except Ribáh ibn Murrah; the sole survivor fled to the Tobba
of Al-Yaman, who sent a host to avenge him. The king commanded his
Himyarites to cut tree-boughs and use them as screens (again Birnam
wood). Zarká from her Utum, or peel-tower, saw the army three
marches off and cried, "O folk, either trees or Himyar are coming
upon you!" adding, in Rajaz verse:--

I swear by Allah that trees creep onward, or that Himyar beareth
somewhat which he draweth along!

She then saw a man mending his sandal. But Jadis disbelieved;
Cassandra was slain and, when her eyes were cut out the vessels
were found full of Ithmid. Hence Al-Mutanabbi sang: 

          "Sharper-sighted than Zarká of Jau" (Yamámah).

See C. de Perceval i. 101; Arab. Prov. i. 192; and Chenery p. 381.
(The Assemblies of Al-Hariri; London, Williams and Norgate, 1867).
I have made many enquiries into the true nature of Ithmid and
failed to learn anything: on the Upper Nile the word is=Kohl.

[FN#197] The general colour of chessmen in the East, where the game
is played on a cloth more often than a board.

[FN#198] Arab. "Al-fil," the elephant=the French fol or fou and our
bishop. I have derived "elephant" from Píl (old Persian, Sansk.
Pilu) and Arab. Fil, with the article Al-Fil, whence the Greek
       the suffix--as being devoted to barbarous words as Obod-as
(Al Ubayd), Aretas (Al-Háris), etc. Mr. Isaac Taylor (The Alphabet
i. 169), preserves the old absurdity of "eleph-ant or ox-like (!)
beast of Africa." Prof. Sayce finds the word al-ab (two distinct
characters) in line 3, above the figure of an (Indian) elephant, on
the black obelisk of Nimrod Mound, and suggests an Assyrian
derivation.

[FN#199] Arab. "Shaukat" which may also mean the "pride" or
"mainstay" (of the army).

[FN#200] Lit. "smote him on the tendons of his neck." This is the
famous shoulder-cut (Tawash shuh) which, with the leg-cut (Kalam),
formed, and still forms, the staple of Eastern attack with the
sword.

[FN#201] Arab. "Dirás." Easterns do not thresh with flails. The
material is strewed over a round and smoothed floor of dried mud in
the open air and threshed by different connivances. In Egypt the
favourite is a chair-like machine called "Norag," running on iron
plates and drawn by bulls or cows over the corn. Generally,
however, Moslems prefer the old classical         , the Tribulum of
Virgil and Varro, a slipper-shaped sled of wood garnished on the
sole with large-headed iron nails, or sharp fragments of flint or
basalt. Thus is made the "Tibn" or straw, the universal hay of the
East, which our machines cannot imitate.

[FN#202] These numbers appear to be grossly exaggerated, but they
were possible in the days of sword and armour: at the battle of
Saffayn the Caliph Ali is said to have cut down five hundred and
twenty-three men in a single night.

[FN#203] Arab. "Bika'á": hence the "Buka'ah" or Cœlesyria.

[FN#204] Richardson in his excellent dictionary (note 103) which
modern priggism finds "unscientific " wonderfully derives this word
from Arab. "Khattáf," a snatcher (i.e. of women), a ravisher. It is
an evident corruption of "captivus" through Italian and French

[FN#205] These periodical and fair-like visitations to convents are
still customary; especially amongst the Christians of Damascus. 

[FN#206] Camphor being then unknown.

[FN#207] The "wrecker" is known all over the world; and not only
barbarians hold that ships driven ashore become the property of the
shore

[FN#208] Arab. "Jokh": it is not a dictionary word, but the only
term in popular use for European broadcloth.

[FN#209] The second person plural is used because the writer would
involve the subjects of his correspondent in the matter.

[FN#210] This part of the phrase, which may seem unnecessary to the
European, is perfectly intelligible to all Orientalists. You may
read many an Eastern letter and not understand it. Compare Boccacoo
iv. 1.

[FN#211] i.e. he was greatly agitated

[FN#212] In text "Li-ajal a al-Taudi'a," for the purpose of
farewelling, a low Egyptianism; emphatically a "Kalám wáti."
(Pilgrimage thee iii. 330.)

[FN#213] In the Mac. Edit. Sharrkan speaks, a clerical error.

[FN#214] The Farsakh (Germ. Stunde) a measure of time rather than
distance, is an hour's travel or its equivalent, a league, a
meile=three English stat. miles. The word is still used in Persia
its true home, but not elsewhere. It is very old, having been
determined as a lineal measure of distance by Herodotus (ii. 5 and
6 ; v. 53), who computes it at 30 furlongs (=furrow-lengths, 8 to
the stat. mile). Strabo (xi.) makes it range from 40 to 60 stades
(each=606 feet 9 inches), and even now it varies between 1,500 to
6,000 yards. Captain Francklin (Tour to Persia) estimates it =
about four miles. (Pilgrimage ii. 113.)

[FN#215] Arab. "Ashhab." Names of colours are few amongst semi
civilised peoples, but in Arabia there is a distinct word for every
shade of horseflesh.

[FN#216] She had already said to him "Thou art beaten in
everything!"

[FN#217] Showing that she was still a Christian.

[FN#218] This is not Badawi sentiment: the honoratioren amongst
wild people would scorn such foul play; but amongst the settled
Arabs honour between men and women is unknown and such "hocussing"
would be held quite fair.

[FN#219] The table of wine, in our day, is mostly a japanned tray
with glasses and bottles, saucers of pickles and fruits and,
perhaps, a bunch of flowers and aromatic herbs. During the
Caliphate the "wine-service" was on a larger scale.

[FN#220] Here the "Bhang" (almost a generic term applied to
hellebore, etc.) may be hyoscyamus or henbane. Yet there are
varieties of Cannabis, such as the Dakha of South Africa capable of
most violent effect. I found the use of the drug well known to the
negroes of the Southern United States and of the Brazil, although
few of their owners had ever heard of it.

[FN#221] Amongst Moslems this is a reference to Adam who first
"sinned against himself,' and who therefore is called "
Safíyu'llah," the Pure of Allah. (Pilgrimage iii. 333.)

[FN#222] Meaning, an angry, violent man.

[FN#223] Arab. "Inshád," which may mean reciting the verse of
another or improvising one's own. In Modern Egypt "Munshid" is the
singer or reciter of poetry at Zikrs (Lane M. E. chaps. xxiv.).
Here the verses are quite bad enough to be improvised by the
hapless Princess.

[FN#224] The negro skin assumes this dust colour in cold, fear,
concupiscence and other mental emotions.

[FN#225] He compares her glance with the blade of a Yamani sword,
a lieu commun of Eastern poetry. The weapons are famous in The
Nights; but the best sword-cutlery came from Persia as the
porcelain from China to Sana'á. Here, however, is especial allusion
as to the sword "Samsam" or "Samsamah." It belonged to the
Himyarite Tobba, Amru bin Ma'ad Kurb, and came into the hands of
Harun al-Rashid. When the Emperor of the Greeks sent a present of
superior sword-blades to him by way of a brave, the Caliph, in the
presence of the Envoys, took "Samsam" in hand and cut the others in
twain as if they were cabbages without the least prejudice to the
edge of "Samsam."

[FN#226] This touch of pathos is truly Arab. So in the "Romance of
Dalhamah" (Lane, M. E. xxiii.) the infant Gundubah sucks the breast
of its dead mother and the King exclaims, "If she had committed
this crime she would not be affording the child her milk after she
was dead."

[FN#227] Arab. "Sadda'l-Aktár," a term picturesque enough to be
preserved in English. "Sadd," I have said, is a wall or dyke, the
term applied to the great dam of water- plants which obstructs the
navigation of the Upper Nile, the lilies and other growths floating
with the current from the (Victoria) Nyanza Lake. I may note that
we need no longer derive from India the lotus-llily so extensively
used by the Ancient Egyptians and so neglected by the moderns that
it has well nigh disappeared. All the Central African basins abound
in the Nymphæa and thence it found its way down the Nile Valley.

[FN#228] Arab. "Al Marhúmah": equivalent to our "late lamented." 

[FN#229] Vulgarly pronounced "Mahmal," and by Egyptians and Turks
"Mehmel." Lane (M. E. xxiv.) has figured this queenly litter and I
have sketched and described it in my Pilgrimage (iii. 12).

[FN#230] For such fits of religious enthusiasm see my Pilgrimage
(iii. 254).

[FN#231] "Irák" (Mesopotamia) means "a level country beside the
banks of a ever."

[FN#232] "Al Kuds," or "Bays al-Mukaddas," is still the popular
name of Jerusalem, from the Heb. Yerushalaim ha-Kadushah (legend on
shekel of Simon Maccabeus).

[FN#233] "Follow the religion of Abraham" says the Koran (chaps.
iii. 89). Abraham, titled "Khalílu'llah," ranks next in dignity to
Mohammed, preceding Isa, I need hardly say that his tomb is not in
Jerusalem nor is the tomb itself at Hebron ever visited. Here
Moslems (soi disant) are allowed by the jealousies of Europe to
close and conceal a place which belongs to the world, especially to
Jews and Christians. The tombs, if they exist, lie in a vault or
cave under the Mosque.

[FN#234] Abá, or Abáyah, vulg. Abayah, is a cloak of hair, goat's
or camel's; too well known to require description.

[FN#235] Arab. "Al-Wakkád," the man who lights and keeps up the
bath-fires.

[FN#236] Arab. "Má al-Khaláf" (or "Khiláf") a sickly perfume but
much prized, made from the flowers of the Salix Ægyptiaca.

[FN#237] Used by way of soap; like glasswort and other plants.

[FN#238] i.e., "Thou art only just recovered."

[FN#239] To "Nakh" is to gurgle "Ikh! Ikh!" till the camel kneels.
Hence the space called "Barr al-Manákhah" in Al-Medinah (Pilgrimage
i. 222, ii. 91). There is a regular camel vocabulary amongst the
Arabs, made up like our "Gee" (go ye!), etc. of significant words
worn down.

[FN#240] Arab. "Laza," the Second Hell provided for Jews.

[FN#241] The word has been explained (vol. i. 112).[see Volume 1,
note 199]  It is trivial, not occurring in the Koran which uses
"Arabs of the Desert ;" "Arabs who dwell in tents," etc. (chaps.
ix. and xxxiii.). "A'arábi" is the classical word and the origin of
"Arab" is disputed. According to Pocock (Notæ Spec. Hist. Arab.):
"Diverse are the opinions concerning the denomination of the Arabs;
but the most certain of all is that which draws it from Arabah,
which is part of the region of Tehama (belonging to Al-Medinah
Pilgrimage ii. 118), which their father Ismail afterwards
inhabited." Tehamah (sierra caliente) is the maritime region of Al
Hijaz, the Moslems Holy Land; and its "Arabah," a very small tract
which named a very large tract, must not be confounded, as some
have done, with the Wady Arabah, the ancient outlet of the Dead
Sea. The derivation of "Arab" from "Ya'arab" a fancied son of
Joktan is mythological. In Heb. Arabia may be called "Eretz Ereb"
(or "Arab")=land of the West; but in Arabic "Gharb" (not Ereb) is
the Occident and the Arab dates long before the Hebrew.

[FN#242] "When thine enemy extends his hand to thee, cut it off if
thou can, or kiss it," wisely said Caliph al-Mansur.

[FN#243] The Tartur was a peculiar turban worn by the Northern
Arabs and shown in old prints. In modern Egypt the term is applied
to the tall sugar-loaf caps of felt affected mostly by regular
Dervishes. Burckhardt (Proverbs 194 and 398) makes it the high cap
of felt or fur proper to the irregular cavalry called Dely or
Delaty. In Dar For (Darfour) "Tartur" is a conical cap adorned with
beads and cowries worn by the Manghwah or buffoon who corresponds
with the Egyptian "Khalbús" or "Maskharah" and the Turkish
"Sutari." For an illustration see Plate iv. fig. 10 of Voyage au
Darfour par Mohammed El Tounsy (The Tunisian), Paris, Duprat, 1845.

[FN#244] The term is picturesque and true; we say "gnaw," which is
not so good.

[FN#245] Here, meaning an Elder, a Chief, etc.; the word has been
almost naturalised in English. I have noted that Abraham was the
first "Shaykh."

[FN#246] This mention of weighing suggests the dust of Dean Swift
and the money of the Gold Coast It was done, I have said, because
the gold coin, besides being "sweated" was soft and was soon worn
down.

[FN#247] Fem. of Nájí (a deliverer, a saviour)=Salvadora.

[FN#248] This, I have noted, is according to Koranic command
(chaps. iv. 88). "When you are saluted with a salutation, salute
the person with a better salutation." The longer answer to "Peace
be with (or upon) thee! " is still universally the custom. The
"Salem" is so differently pronounced by every Eastern nation that
the observant traveller will easily make of it a Shibboleth.

[FN#249] The Badawi, who was fool as well as rogue, begins to fear
that he has kidnapped a girl of family.

[FN#250] These examinations being very indecent are usually done in
strictest privacy. The great point is to make sure of virginity.

[FN#251] This is according to strict Moslem law: the purchaser may
not look at the girl's nakedness till she is his, and he ought to
manage matters through an old woman.

[FN#252] Lit. wrath; affliction which chokes; in Hindustani it
means simply anger.

[FN#253] i.e. Heaven forbid I be touched by a strange man.

[FN#254] Used for fuel and other purposes, such as making "doss
stick."

[FN#255] Arab "Yaftah'Allah" the offer being insufficient. The
rascal is greedy as a Badaw and moreover he is a liar, which the
Badawi is not.

[FN#256] The third of the four great Moslem schools of Theology,
taking its name from the Imam al-Sháfi'í (Mohammed ibn Idrís) who
died in Egypt A.H. 204, and lies buried near Cairo. (Sale's Prel.
Disc. sect. viii.)

[FN#257] The Moslem form of Cabbala, or transcendental philosophy
of the Hebrews. 

[FN#258] Arab. "Bakh" the word used by the Apostle to Ali his
son-in-law. It is the Latin "Euge."

[FN#259] Readers, who read for amusement, will do well to "skip"
the fadaises of this highly educated young woman.

[FN#260] There are three Persian Kings of this name (Artaxerxes)
which means "Flour and milk," or "high lion." The text alludes to
Ardeshir Babegan, so called because he married the daughter of
Babak the shepherd, founder of the Sassanides in A.D. 202. See
D,Herberot, and the Dabistan.

[FN#261] Alluding to the proverb, "Folk follow their King's faith,"
"Cujus regio ejus religio" etc.

[FN#262] Second Abbaside, A.H. 136-158 (=754-775).

[FN#263] The celebrated companion of Mohammed who succeeded Abu
Bakr in the Caliphate (A.H. 13-23=634-644). The Sunnis know him as
Al-Adil the Just, and the Shiahs detest him for his usurpation, his
austerity and harshness. It is said that he laughed once and wept
once. The laugh was caused by recollecting how he ate his
dough-gods (the idols of the Hanifah tribe) in The Ignorance. The
tears were drawn by remembering how he buried alive his baby
daughter who, while the grave was being dug, patted away the dust
from his hair and beard. Omar was doubtless a great man, but he is
one of the most ungenial figures in Moslem history which does not
abound in genialities. To me he suggests a Puritan, a Covenanter of
the sourest and narrowest type; and I cannot wonder that the
Persians abhor him, and abuse him on all occasions.

[FN#264] The austere Caliph Omar whose scourge was more feared than
the sword was the - author of the celebrated saying "Consult them
(feminines) and do clear contrary-wise."

[FN#265] Our "honour amongst thieves."

[FN#266] The sixth successor of Mohammed and founder of the Banu
Umayyah or Ommiades, called the "sons of the little mother" from
their eponymus (A.H. 41-60=661-680). For his Badawi wife Maysun,
and her abuse of her husband, see Pilgrimage iii. 262.

[FN#267] Shaykh of the noble tribe, or rather nation, Banu Tamím
and a notable of the day, surnamed, no one knows why, "Sire of the
Sea."

[FN#268] This is essential for cleanliness in hot lands: however
much the bath may be used, the body-pile and lower hair, if
submitted to a microscope, will show more or less sordes adherent.
The axilla-hair is plucked because if shaved the growing pile
causes itching and the depilatories are held deleterious. At first
vellication is painful but the skin becomes used to it. The pecten
is shaved either without or after using depilatories, of which more
presently. The body-pile is removed by "Takhfíf"; the Libán Shámi
(Syrian incense), a fir- gum imported from Scio, is melted and
allowed to cool in the form of a pledget. This is passed over the
face and all the down adhering to it is pulled up by the roots
(Burckhardt No. 420). Not a few Anglo-Indians have adopted these
precautions

[FN#269] This Caliph was a tall, fair, handsome man of
awe-inspiring aspect. Omar used to look at him and say, "This is
the Cæsar of the Arabs," while his wife called him a "fatted ass."

[FN#270] The saying is attributed to Abraham when "exercised" by
the unkindly temper of Sarah; "woman is made hard and crooked like
a rib;" and the modern addition is, "whoso would straighten her,
breaketh her."

[FN#271] i.e. "When ready and in erection."

[FN#272] "And do first (before going in to your wives) some act
which may be profitable unto your souls" or, for you: soul's good.
(Koran, chaps. ii. 223.) Hence Ahnaf makes this prayer.

[FN#273] It was popularly said that "Truth-speaking left Omar
without a friend." Entitled "The Just" he was murdered by Abu
Lúlúah, alias Fírúz, a (Magian ?) slave of Al-Maghírah for denying
him justice.

[FN#274] Governor of Bassorah under the first four Caliphs. See
D'Herbelot s.v. "Aschári."

[FN#275] Ziyad bin Abi Sufyan, illegitimate brother of the Caliph
Mu'awiyah afterwards governor of Bassorah, Cufa and Al-Hijaz.

[FN#276] The seditions in Kufah were mainly caused by the wilful
nepotism of Caliph Othman bin Asákir which at last brought about
his death. His main quality seems to have been personal beauty:
"never was seen man or woman of fairer face than he and he was the
most comely of men:" he was especially famed for beautiful teeth
which in old age he bound about with gold wire. He is described as
of middling stature, large- limbed, broad shouldered, fleshy of
thigh and long in the fore-arm which was hairy. His face inclined
to yellow and was pock-marked; his beard was full and his curly
hair, which he dyed yellow, fell below his ears. He is called
"writer of the Koran" from his edition of the M.S., and "Lord of
the two Lights" because he married two of the Prophet's daughters,
Rukayyah and Umm Kulthum; and, according to the Shi'ahs who call
him Othman-i-Lang or" limping Othman," he vilely maltreated them.
They justify his death as the act of an Ijmá' al-Muslimín, the
general consensus of Moslems which ratifies "Lynch law." Altogether
Othman is a mean figure in history.

[FN#277] "Nár" (fire) is a word to be used delicately from its
connection with Gehenna. You say, e.g. "bring me a light, a coal
(bassah)" etc.; but if you say "bring me fire! " the enemy will
probably remark "He wanteth fire even before his time!" The slang
expression would be "bring the sweet." (Pilgrimage i. 121.)

[FN#278] Omar is described as a man of fair complexion, and very
ruddy, but he waxed tawny with age, when he also became bald and
grey. He had little hair on the cheeks but a long mustachio with
reddish ends. In stature he overtopped the people and was stout as
he was tall. A popular saying of Mohammed's is, "All (very) long
men are fools save Omar, and all (very) short men are knaves save
Ali." The Persians, who abhor Omar, compare every lengthy,
ungainly, longsome thing with him; they will say, "This road never
ends, like the entrails of Omar." We know little about Ali's
appearance except that he was very short and stout, broad and
full-bellied with a tawny complexion and exceedingly hairy, his
long beard, white as cotton, filling all the space between his
shoulders. He was a "pocket. Hercules," and incredible tales, like
that about the gates of Khaybar, are told of his strength. Lastly,
he was the only Caliph who bequeathed anything to literature: his
"Cantiloquium" is famous and he has left more than one mystical and
prophetic work. See Ockley for his "Sentences" and D'Herbelot s. D.
"Ali" and "Gebr." Ali is a noble figure in Moslem history.

[FN#279] The emancipation from the consequences of his sins; or it
may mean a holy death.

[FN#280] Battle fought near Al-Medinah A.D. 625. The word is
derived from "shad" (one). I have described the site in my
Pilgrimage, (vol. ii. 227).

[FN#281] "Haphsa" in older writers; Omar's daughter and one of
Mohammed's wives, famous for her connection with the manuscripts of
the Koran. From her were (or claimed to be) descended the Hafsites
who reigned in Tunis and extended their power far and wide over the
Maghrib (Mauritania), till dispossessed by the Turks.

[FN#282] i.e. humbly without the usual strut or swim: it
corresponds with the biblical walking or going softly. (I Kings
xxi. 27; Isaiah xxxviii. 15, etc.)

[FN#283] A theologian of the seventh and eighth centuries.

[FN#284] i.e. to prepare himself by good works, especially
alms-giving, for the next world.

[FN#285] A theologian of the eighth century.

[FN#286] Abd al-Aziz was eighth Ommiade (regn. A.H. 99=717) and the
fifth of the orthodox, famed for a piety little known to his house.
His most celebrated saying was, " Be constant in meditation on
death: if thou bein straitened case 'twill enlarge it, and if in
affluence 'twill straiten it upon thee." He died. poisoned, it is
said, in A.H 101,

[FN#287] Abu Bakr originally called Abd al-Ka'abah (slave of the
Ka'abah) took the name of Abdullah and was surnamed Abu Bakr
(father of the virgin) when Mohammed, who before had married only
widows, took to wife his daughter, the famous or infamous Ayishah.
"Bikr" is the usual form, but "Bakr," primarily meaning a young
camel, is metaphorically applied to human youth (Lane's Lex. s.
c.). The first Caliph was a cloth-merchant, like many of the Meccan
chiefs. He is described as very fair with bulging brow, deep set
eyes and thin-checked, of slender build and lean loined, stooping
and with the backs of his hands fleshless. He used tinctures of
Henna and Katam for his beard. The Persians who hate him, call him
"Pir-i-Kaftár," the old she-hyaena, and believe that he wanders
about the deserts of Arabia in perpetual rut which the males must
satisfy.

[FN#288] The second, fifth, sixth and seventh Ommiades.

[FN#289] The mother of Omar bin Abd al-Aziz was a granddaughter of
Omar bin al-Khattab. 

[FN#290] Brother of this Omar's successor, Yezid II.

[FN#291] So the Turkish proverb "The fish begins to stink at the
head."

[FN#292] Calling to the slaves.

[FN#293] When the "Day of Arafat" (9th of Zú'l-Hijjah) falls upon
a Friday. For this Hajj al- Akbar see my Pilgrimage iii. 226. It is
often confounded by writers (even by the learned M. Caussin de
Perceval) with the common Pilgrimage as opposed to the Umrah, or "
Lesser Pilgrimage" (ibid. iii. 342, etc.). The latter means
etymologically cohabiting with a woman in her father's house as
opposed to 'Ars or leading her to the husband's home: it is applied
to visiting Meccah and going through all the pilgrim-rites but not
at the Pilgrimage-season. Hence its title "Hajj al-Asghar" the
"Lesser Hajj." But "Umrah" is also applied to a certain ceremony
between the hills Safá (a large hard rock) and Marwah (stone full
of flints), which accompanies the Hajj and which I have described
(ibid. iii. 344). At Meccah I also heard of two places called
Al-Umrah, the Greater in the Wady Fátimah and the Lesser half way
nearer the city (ibid. iii. 344).

[FN#294] A fair specimen of the unworthy egoism which all religious
systems virtually inculcate Here a pious father leaves his children
miserable to save his own dirty soul. 

[FN#295] Chief of the Banú Tamín, one of the noblest of tribes,
derived from Tamím, the uncle of Kuraysh (Koreish); hence the poets
sang:--

     There cannot be a son nobler than Kuraysh,
     Nor an uncle nobler than Tamím.

The high minded Tamín is contrasted with the mean-spirited Kays,
who also gave rise to a tribe; and hence the saying concerning one
absolutely inconsistent, "Art thou now Tamín and then Kays?"

[FN#296] Surnamed Al-Sakafi, Governor of Al-Yaman and Irak.

[FN#297] Tenth Ommiade (regn. A H. 105-125 = 724-743).

[FN#298] Or "clothe thee in worn-out clothes" i.e. "Become a Fakir"
or religious mendicant.

[FN#299] This gratuitous incest in ignorance injures the tale and
is as repugnant to Moslem as to Christian taste.

[FN#300] The child is named either on the day of its birth or on
that day week. The father whispers it in the right ear, often
adding the Azán or prayer-call, and repeating in the left ear the
"Ikámah" or Friday sentence. There are many rules for choosing
names according to the week-day, the ascendant planet, the "Sortes
Coranicæ," etc.

[FN#301] Amongst Moslems as amongst Christians there are seven
deadly sins: idolatry, murder, falsely charging modest women with
unchastity, robbing orphans, usury, desertion in Holy War and
disobedience to parents. The difference between the two creeds is
noteworthy. And the sage knows only three, intemperance, ignorance
and egoism.

[FN#302] Meaning, "It was decreed by Destiny; so it came to pass,"
appropriate if not neat.

[FN#303] The short, stout, dark, long-haired and two-bunched camel
from "Bukhtar" (Bactria), the "Eastern" (Bakhtar) region on the Amu
or Jayhun (Oxus) River; afterwards called Khorasan. The two-humped
camel is never seen in Arabia except with northern caravans, and to
speak of it would be a sore test of Badawi credulity.

[FN#304] "Kaylúlah" is the "forty-winks" about noon: it is a Sunnat
or Practice of the Prophet who said, "Make the mid-day siesta, for
verily at this hour the devils sleep not." "Aylúlain" is slumbering
after morning prayers (our "beauty-sleep"), causing heaviness andid
leness: "Ghaylúlah" is dozing about 9 a.m. engendering poverty and
wretchedness: "Kaylúlah" (with the guttural Kaf) is sleeping before
evening prayers and "Faylúlah" is slumbering after sunset--both
held to be highly detrimental. (Pilgrimage ii 49.)

[FN#305] The Biblical "Hamath" (Hightown) too well known to require
description. It is still famous for the water-wheels mentioned by
al-Hariri (assembly of the Banu Harám).

[FN#306] When they say, "The levee flashes bright on the hills of
Al-Yaman," the allusion is to the south quarter, where
summer-lightning is seen. Al-Yaman (always with the article) means,
I have said, the right-hand region to one facing the rising sun and
Al-Sham (Syria) the left-hand region.

[FN#307] Again "he" for "she," in delicacy and jealousy of making
public the beauty or conditions of the "veiled sex." Even public
singers would hesitate to use a feminine pronoun. As will be seen
however, the rule is not invariably kept and hardly ever in Badawi
poetry.

[FN#308] The normal pun on "Nuzhat al-Zaman" = Delight of the Age
or Time.

[FN#309] The reader will find in my Pilgrimage (i. 305) a sketch of
the Takht-rawan or travelling-litter, in which pilgrimesses are
wont to sleep.

[FN#310] In poetry it holds the place of our Zephyr; end the "Bád-
i-Sabá"=Breeze o' the morn, Is much addressed by Persian poets.

[FN#311] Here appears the nervous, excitable, hysterical Arab
temperament which is almost phrensied by the neighbourhood of a
home from which he had run away.

[FN#312] Zau al-Makan and Nuzhat al-Zaman.

[FN#313] The idea is essentially Eastern, "A lion at home and a
lamb abroad" is the popular saying.

[FN#314] Arab. "Hubb al-Watan" (= love of birthplace, patriotism)
of which the Tradition says "Min al-Imán" (=is part of man's
religion).

[FN#315] He is supposed to speak en prince; and he yields to a
prayer when he spurns a command. 

[FN#316] In such caravans each party must keep its own place under
pain of getting into trouble with the watchmen and guards.

[FN#317] Mr. Payne (ii. 109) borrows this and the next quotation
from the Bull Edit. i. 386.

[FN#318] For the expiation of inconsiderate oaths see Koran (chaps.
v.). I cannot but think that Al-Islam treats perjury too lightly:
all we can say is-that it improves upon Hinduism which practically
seems to leave the punishment to the gods.

[FN#319] "Kausar," as has been said, represents the classical
nectar, the Amrita of the Hindus.

[FN#320] From Bull Edit. i. 186. The couplet in the Mac. Edit. i.
457 is very wildly applied.

[FN#321] The "insula" of Sancho Panza.

[FN#322] This should have assured him that he stood in no danger.

[FN#323] Here ends the wearisome tale of the brother and sister,
and the romance of chivalry begins once more with the usual Arab
digressions.

[FN#324] I have derived this word from the Persian "rang"=colour,
hue, kind.

[FN#325] Otherwise all would be superseded, like U. S. officials
under a new President.

[FN#326] Arab. "Nímshah" from the Pers. Nímchah, a "half-sword," a
long dagger worn in the belt. Richardson derives it from Namsh,
being freckled (damasked).

[FN#327] The Indian term for a tent large enough to cover a troop
of cavalry.

[FN#328] Arab. "Marhúm" a formula before noticed. It is borrowed
from the Jewish, "of blessed memory" (after the name of the
honoured dead, Prov. x. 17.); with the addition of "upon whom be
peace," as opposed to the imprecation, "May the name of the wicked
rot!"

[FN#329] The speeches of the five damsels should be read only by
students.

[FN#330] i.e. Those who look for "another and a better."

[FN#331] The title of Caliph Abu Bakr because he bore truthful
witness to the Apostle's mission or, others say, he confirmed the
"Mi'ráj" or nocturnal journey to Heaven.

[FN#332] All this is Koranic (chaps. ii., etc.).

[FN#333] This may have applied more than once to "hanging judges"
in the Far West.

[FN#334] A traditionist and jurisconsult of Al-Medinah in the
seventh and eighth centuries.

[FN#335] The Alexander of the Koran and Eastern legends, not to be
confounded with the Alexander of Macedon. He will be noticed in a
future Night.

[FN#336] Æsop, according to the Arabs: of him or rather of the two
Lukmans, more presently. 

[FN#337] Koran ii. 185.

[FN#338] Mohammed.

[FN#339] One of the Asháb or Companions of Mohammed.

[FN#340] A noted traditionist at Cufa in the seventh century.

[FN#341] Koran, chaps. lxxiv. I (and verse 8 follows). The
Archangel Gabriel is supposed to address Mohammed and not a few
divines believe this Surah (chapter) to have been first revealed.
Mr. Rodwell makes it No. ii. following the Fatrah or silent
interval which succeeded No. xcvi. "Clots of Blood." See his 2nd
Edit. p. 3 for further details.

[FN#342] i.e. dangerous to soul-health.

[FN#343] In the Mac. Edit. "Abd" for "Sa'id." The latter was a
black and a native of Cufa during the first century (A.H ) and is
still famous as a traditionist.

[FN#344] Arab. "Shirk," giving a partner to Allah, attending
chiefly to Christians and idolaters and in a minor degree to Jews
and Guebres. We usually English it by "polytheism," which is clumsy
and conveys a wrong idea

[FN#345] Grandson of the Caliph Ali. He is one of the Imams
(High-priests) of the Shi'ah school.

[FN#346] An eminent traditionist of the eighth century (A.D.).

[FN#347] The prayers of the Fast-month and Pilgrimage-month are
often said in especial places outside the towns and cities; these
are the Indian Id(Eed-)gáh. They have a screen of wall about a
hundred yards long with a central prayer-niche and the normal three
steps for the preacher; and each extremity is garnished with an
imitation minaret. They are also called Namáz-gah and one is
sketched by Herklots (Plate iii. fig. 2). The object of the trips
thither in Zu'l-Ka'adah and Zu'l-Hijjah is to remind Moslems of the
"Ta'aríf," or going forth from Meccah to Mount Arafat.

[FN#348] Arab. "Al-Háfi," which in Egyptian means sore-footed as
well. He was an ascetic of the eighth and ninth centuries (A.D.).
He relates a tradition of the famous soldier saint Khálid bin Walíd
who lies buried like the poet Ka'ab al-Ahbár near Hums (Emessa)
once the Bœotia, Phrygia, Abdera, Suabia of Syria now Halbun
(pronounced Halbáun) near Damascus. I cannot explain how this
Kuraysh noble (a glorious figure in Moslem history) is claimed by
the Afghans as one of their countrymen and made to speak Pukhtu or
Pushtu, their rough old dialect of Persian. The curious reader will
consult my Pilgrimage iii. 322 for the dialogue between Mohammed
and Khalid. Again there is general belief in Arabia that the
English sent a mission to the Prophet, praying that Khalid might be
despatched to proselytise them: unfortunately Mohammed was dead and
the "Ingríz" ratted. It is popularly held that no armed man can
approach Khalid's grave; but I suppose my revolver did not count.

[FN#349] When he must again wash before continuing prayer.

[FN#350] Bin Adham; another noted ascetic of the eighth century.
Those curious about these unimportant names will consult the great
Biographical Dictionary of Ibn Khallikan, translated by Baron
MacGuckin de Slane (1842-45).

[FN#351] Thus making Bishr the "Imám" (artistes) lit. one who
stands in front. In Koran xvii. 74 it means "leader": in ii. 118
Allah makes Abraham an "Imam to mankind."

[FN#352] A favourite sentiment in the East: we find it at the very
beginning of Sa'di's Gulistan: better a weal-bringing lie than a
harm-dealing truth.

[FN#353] A penny, one sixth of the drachma.

[FN#354] Founder of the Hanbali, fourth (in date) of the four
orthodox Moslem schools. The Caliph al-Mu'atasim bi'llah, son of
Harun al-Rashid, who believed the Koran to have been created and
not a Logos (whatever that may be), co-eternal with Allah, scourged
this Imam severely for "differing in opinion" (A.H. 220=833). In
fact few of the notable reverends of that day escaped without a
caress of the scourge or the sword.

[FN#355] A learned man of the eighth century at Bassorah (A.D.).

[FN#356] A traditionist of Khorasan in the ninth century (A.D.).

[FN#357] "Azal," opp. to "Abad," eternity without end, infinity.

[FN#358] Koran lxvi. 6.

[FN#359] A traditionist of Al-Medinah, eighth century (A.D.).

[FN#360] Arab. "Músá": the Egyptian word was "Mesu," the "child" or
the "boy" (brought up in the palace?), and the Hebrews made it
"Mosheh" or "one drawn out of the water;" "Mu" in Egypt being
water, the Arab "Ma"; whence probably the moderns have derived the
dim. "Moyeh ," vulg. Egyptian for water.

[FN#361] Koran, chaps. xxviii.: Shu'ayb is our Jethro: Koran,
chaps. vii. and xi. Mr. Rodwell suggests (p. 101) that the name has
been altered from Hobab (Numb. x. 29).

[FN#362] Arab. "Taub" (Saub), the long shirt popularly written in
English Tobe and pronounced so by Egyptians. It is worn by both
sexes (Lane, M. E. chaps. i. "Tob") in Egypt, and extends into the
heart of Moslem Africa: I can compare it with nothing but a long
nightgown dyed a dirty yellow by safflower and about as picturesque
as a carter's smock-frock.

[FN#363] There is nothing of this in the Koran; and it is a most
unhappy addition, as Moses utterly and pretentiously ignored a
"next world."

[FN#364] Koran xxviii. 22-27. Mohammed evidently confounded the
contract between Laban and Jacob. (Gen. xxix. 15-39.)

[FN#365] So says Al-Hariri (Ass. of Sasan), "The neighbour before
the house and the traveller before the journey." In certain cities
the neighbourhood is the real detective police, noting every action
and abating scandals (such as orgies, etc.) with a strong hand and
with the full consent of public opinion and of the authorities.
This loving the neighbour shows evident signs of being borrowed
from Christianity.

[FN#366] Al-Asamm a theologian of Balkh, ninth century (A.D.).

[FN#367] The founder of the Senior School, for which see Sale Prel.
Disc. sect. viii.

[FN#368] Thus serving the Lord by sinning against his own body.

[FN#369] An Egyptian doctor of the law (ninth century).

[FN#370] Koran lxxvii. 35, 36. This is one of the earliest and most
poetical chapters of the book.

[FN#371] Abu Hanifah was scourged for refusing to take office and
was put to death in prison, it is said by poison (A.H. 150=A.D.
767), for a judicial sentence authorising rebellion against the
second Abbaside, Al-Mansur, surnamed Abu'l-Dawánik (Father of
Pence) for his exceeding avarice.

[FN#372] "Lá rayba fí-hi" says the Koran (ii. 1) of itself; and the
saying is popularly applied to all things of the Faith.

[FN#373] Arab. "Rivál al-Ghayb," somewhat like the "Himalayan
Brothers" of modern superstition. See Herklots (Qanoon-e-Islam) for
a long and careful description of these "Mardán-i-Ghayb" (Pers.),
a "class of people mounted on clouds," invisible, but moving in a
circular orbit round the world, and suggesting the Hindu
"Lokapálas." They should not be in front of the traveller nor on
his right, but either behind or on his left hand. Hence tables,
memorial couplets and hemistichs are required to ascertain the
station, without which precaution journeys are apt to end badly.

[FN#374] A sweetmeat before noticed.

[FN#375] Door hinges in the east are two projections for the top
and bottom of the leaf playing in hollows of the lintel and
threshold. It appears to be the primitive form, for we find it in
the very heart of Africa. In the basaltic cities of the Hauran,
where the doors are of thick stone, they move easily on these pins.
I found them also in the official (not the temple)City of Palmyra,
but all broken.

[FN#376] The effect of the poison and of the incantation which
accompanied it.

[FN#377] King Omar who had raped her. My sympathies are all with
the old woman who nightly punished the royal lecher.

[FN#378] Arab. "Zunnár," the Gr.     . Christians and Jews were
compelled by the fanatical sumptuary laws of the Caliph Al-
Mutawakkil (AD. 856) to wear a broad leather belt in public, hence
it became a badge of the Faith. Probably it was confounded with the
"Janeo" (Brahmanical thread) and the Parsi sacred girdle called
Kashti. (Dabistan i, 297, etc.). Both Mandeville and La Brocquière
speak of "Christians of the Girdle, because they are all girt
above," intending Jacobites or Nestorians.

[FN#379] "Siláh dár" (Arab. and Pers.)=a military officer of high
rank; literally an "armour-bearer," chosen for velour and
trustworthiness. So Jonathan had a "young man" (brave) who bare his
armour (I Sam. xiv. 1, 6 and 7); and Goliath had a man that bare
the shield before him (ibid. xvii. 7, 41). Men will not readily
forget the name of Sulayman Agha, called the Silahdar, in Egypt.
(Lane M. E. chaps. iv.)

[FN#380] It will be told afterwards.

[FN#381] The elder brother thus showed himself a vassal and proved
himself a good Moslem by not having recourse to civil war.

[FN#382] Arab. "Ghazwah," the corrupt Gallicism, now
Europeanised=raid, foray.

[FN#383] Turk in modern parlance means a Turkoman, a pomade: the
settled people call themselves Osmanli or Othmanli. Turkoman=Turk-
like.

[FN#384] Arab. "Nimsá;" southern Germans, Austrians; from the Slav.
"Nemica" (any Germans), literally meaning "The dumb" (nemac),
because they cannot speak Slav.

[FN#385] Arab. "Dubárá" from the Slav. "Dubrovnik," from "Dub" (an
oak) and "Dubrava" (an oak forest). Ragusa, once a rival of Venice,
gave rise to the word "Argosy." D'Herbelot calls it "Dobravenedik"
or "Good Venice," the Turkish name, because it paid tribute when
Venice would not (?).

[FN#386] Arab. "Jawarnah," or, "Júrnah" evidently Zara, a place of
many names, Jadera (Hirtius de Bell. Alex. cap. 13), Jadra, Zadra
(whence the modern term), Diadora, Diadosca and Jadrossa. This
important Liburnian city sent forth many cruisers in crusading
days; hence the Arabs came to know its name.

[FN#387] Arab. "Banu'l-Asfar;" which may mean "Pale faces," in the
sense of "yeller girls" (New Orleans) and that intended by North
American Indians, or, possibly, the peoples with yellow (or rather
tow-coloured) hair we now call Russians. The races of Hindostan
term the English not "white men," but "red men;" and the reason
will at once be seen by comparing a Britisher with a high-caste
Nágar Brahman whose face is of parchment colour as if he had drunk
exsangue cuminum. The Yellow-faces of the text correspond with the
Sansk. "Svetadvipa"--Whiteman's Land.

[FN#388] Arab. "Al-Musakhkham." No Moslem believes that Isa was
crucified and a favourite fancy is that Judas, changed to the
likeness of Jesus, thus paid for his treason. (Evangel. Barnabæ.)
Hence the resurrection is called not "Kiyámah" but
"Kumámah"=rubbish. This heresy about the Cross they share with the
Docetes, "certain beasts in the shape of men" (says Ignatius), who
held that a phantom was crucified. So far the Moslems are logical,
for "Isa," being angelically, miraculously and immaculately
conceived, could not be; but they contradict themselves when they
hold a vacant place near Mohammed's tomb for the body of Isa after
his second coming as a forerunner to Mohammed and Doomday.
(Pilgrimage ii. 89.)

[FN#389] A diviner, priest, esp. Jewish, and not belonging to the
tribe of Levi.

[FN#390] Again the coarsest word "Khara." The allusion is to the
vulgar saying, "Thou eatest skite!" (i.e. thou talkest nonsense).
Decent English writers modify this to, "Thou eatest dirt:" and Lord
Beaconsfield made it ridiculous by turning it into "eating sand."

[FN#391] These silly scandals, which cause us only to smile, excite
Easterns to fury. I have seen a Moslem wild with rage on hearing a
Christian parody the opening words of the Koran, "Bismillahi 'l-
Rahmáni 'l-Rahím, Mismish wa Kamar al-din," roughly translated,

 "In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate!
Apricots and marmalede." The idea of the Holy Merde might have been
suggested by the Hindus: see Mandeville, of the archiprotopapaton
(prelate) carrying ox-dung and urine to the King, who therewith
anoints his brow and breast, &c. And, incredible to relate, this is
still practiced after a fashion by the Parsis, one of the most
progressive and the sharpest witted of Asiatic races.

[FN#392] Meaning that he had marked his brow with a cross (of
ashes?) as certain do on Ash Wednesday.

[FN#393] Syria, the "left-hand land" as has before been explained.
The popular saying about its people is "Shámi shúmi!"--the Syrian
is small potatoes (to render the sense Americanicè). Nor did Syrus,
the slave in Roman days, bear the best of names. In Al-Hijaz the
Syrian is addressed "Abú Shám" (Father of Syria) and insulted as
"Abuser of the Salt" (a traitor). Yet many sayings of Mohammed are
recorded in honour of Syria, and he sometimes used Syriac words.
Such were "Bakh, bakh" (=euge, before noticed), and "Kakh," a
congener of the Latin Cacus and Caca which our day has docked to
"cack." (Pilgrimage iii. 115)

[FN#394] Koran xiv. 34. "They (Unbelievers) shall be thrown therein
(i.e., the House of Perdition=Hell); and an unhappy dwelling shall
it be."

[FN#395] The leg-cut is a prime favourite with the Eastern Sworder,
and a heavy two-handed blade easily severs a horse's leg.

[FN#396] Mohammed repeatedly declared (Koran lxi.) that the
Christians had falsified the passage ("I go to my Father and the
Paraclete shall come," John xvi. 7) promising the advent of the
Comforter,            (ibid. xiv. 20; xv. 26) by substituting the
latter word for           glorious, renowned, i.e., Ahmed or
Mohammed=the praised one. This may have been found in the Arabic
translation of the Gospels made by Warakah, cousin to Mohammed's
first wife; and hence in Koran lxi. we find Jesus prophesying of an
Apostle "whose name shall be Ahmad." The word has consequently been
inserted into the Arabic Gospel of Saint Barnabas (Dabistan iii.
67). Moslems accept the Pentateuch, the Psalter and the Gospel; but
assert (Koran, passim.) that all extant copies have been hopelessly
corrupted, and they are right. Moses, to whom the Pentateuch is
attributed, notices his own death and burial--"the mair the
miracle," said the old Scotch lady. The "Psalms of David" range
over a period of some five hundred years, and there are three
Isaiahs who pass with the vulgar for one. The many apocryphal
Gospels, all of which have been held genuine and canonical at
different times and in different places, prove that the four, which
are still in use, were retained because they lack the manifest
absurdities of their discarded rivals.

[FN#397] Arab. " Labbayka; " the Pilgrimage-cry (Night xxii.) which
in Arabic is,

     Labbayk' Allahumma, Labbayk'!
     Lá Sharíka lake, Labbayk'!
     Inna 'l-hamda w'al ni'amata lake wa'l mulk!
     Labbayk' Allahumma, Labbayk'!

Some add "Here am I, and I honour Thee, the son of Thy two slaves;
beneficence and good are all between Thy hands."With the "Talbiyah"
the pilgrims should bless the Prophet, pray Allah to grant Heaven
and exclaim, "By Thy mercy spare us from the pains of Hell-fire!"
(Pilgrimage iii. 232.) Labbayka occurs in the verses attributed to
Caliph Ali; so labba=he faced, and yalubbu=it faces (as one house
faces another); lastly, he professed submission to Allah; in which
sense, together with the verbal noun "Talbiyah," it is used by Al-
Hanri (Pref. and Ass. of Su'adah).

[FN#398] Arab. "Kissís" (plur. Kusús) from ‘            .

[FN#399] Koran ii. The "red cow" is evidently the "red heifer" of
Barnabas, chaps. vii.

[FN#400] Arab. "Al-Jásalík"=         .

[FN#401] This is from the first "Gospel of Infancy," wherein Jesus
said to his mother, "Verily I am Jesus, the Son of God, the Word
which thou hast brought forth, as the Angel Gabriel did declare
unto thee; and my Father hath sent me to save the world" (chaps. i.
2.). The passage is virtually quoted in the Koran (chaps. iii.
141), of course omitting " the Son of God"

[FN#402] Mohammed allowed his locks to grow down to his ear-lobes
but never lower.

[FN#403] Arab. "Lisám" I have explained as a covering for the lower
face, made by drawing over it the corner of the head-kerchief
(Pilgrimage i. 346). The Lisám of the African Tawárik hoods the
eyes so that a man must turn up his face to see, and swathes all
the lower half, leaving only the nose exposed. And this is worn by
many men by night as well as by day, doubtless to avoid the evil
eye. The native Sultans of Darfur, like those of Bornu and others
further west, used white muslin as a face-wrap: hence, too, the
ceremonies when spitting, etc., etc. The Kúfiyah or head-kerchief
of the Arabs soon reached Europe and became in Low Latin Cuphia; in
Spanish Escofia; in Ital. Cuffia or Scuffia; in French Escoffion,
Scofion (Reine Marguerite) Coëffe (une pellicule, marque de
bonheur) Coiffe and Coife, &c.; the Scotch Curch or Coif, opposed
to the maiden snood, and, lastly our Sergeant-at-Law's Coif.
Littré, the Learned, who in erudition was né coiffé, has missed
this obvious derivation.

[FN#404] "Cutting," throughout the book, alludes to the scymitar
with which Arabs never give point; and "thrusting" to the footman's
spear and the horseman's lance.

[FN#405] A popular phrase, I repeat, for extreme tenor and
consternation.

[FN#406] The name usually applies to a well-known district and city
of Al Yaman, where "Koss the eloquent" was bishop in Mohammed's
day: the Negiran of D'Herbelot. Here, however, it is the Syrian
Najrán (Nejrân of Missionary Porter's miserable Handbook), now a
wretched village near the volcanic Lajjá, about one hundred and
twenty miles direct south of Damascus and held by Druzes and
Christians.

[FN#407] The Kantár (quintal) of 100 ratls (Ibs.) =98-99 Ibs.
avoir.

[FN#408] Arab. "Juráb (bag) mi'adat- ih (of his belly)," the
"curdling of the testicles" in fear is often mentioned.

[FN#409] Clearly alluding to the magic so deeply studied by
mediæval Jews.

[FN#410] Arab. "Sahákah," lit. rubbing. The Moslem Harem is a great
school for this "Lesbian (which I would call Atossan) love "; but
the motive of the practice lies deeper. As amongst men the mixture
of the feminine with the masculine temperament leads to sodomy, so
the reverse makes women prefer their own sex. These tribades are
mostly known by peculiarities of form and features, hairy cheeks
and upper lips, gruff voices, hircine odour and the large
projecting clitoris with erectile powers known to the Arabs as
"bazar" hence Tabzír=circumcision or amputation of such clitoris.
Burckhardt (Prov. 436) translates " Bazarah" by slut or wench. He
adds " it originally signifies the labia which the Cairenes also
entice Zambúr and which are cut off in girlhood." See also Lane,
Lex. s.v.; Tabzír. Both writers confuse excision of the nymphæ with
circumcision of the clitoris (Zambúr) Al-Siyúti (Kitab al-Izá'
fi'Ilm al-Nikah) has a very interesting chapter on Sapphic venery,
which is well known to Europe as proved by such works as "Gamiani,"
and "Anandria ou Confessions de Mademoiselle Sappho, avec la Clef,"
Lesbos, 1718. Onanism is fatally prevalent: in many Harems and
girls' schools tallow candles and similar succedanea are vainly
forbidden and bananas when detected are cut into four so as to be
useless; of late years, however, China has sent some marvellous
artificial phalli of stuffed bladder, horn and even caoutchouc, the
latter material of course borrowed from Europe.

[FN#411] This is considered a powerful aphrodisiac in the East.
Hence male devotees are advised to avoid tile "two reds," i.e. meat
and wine; while the "two reds," which corrupt women, are gold and
saffron, that is perfumery. Hence also the saying of Mohammed:--
"Perfumes for men should have scent and not colour; for women
should have colour and not scent." (Mishkát al-Masábíh ii. 361.)

[FN#412] These are the "Hibás" or thin cords of wool which the
Badawi binds round his legs, I believe to keep off cramp.
(Pilgrimage iii. 78).

[FN#413] Crying out "La iláha illa 'llah." (There is no god but the
God.); technically called "Tahlíl."

[FN#414] i.e. Men, angels and devils, the "Triloka" (triple people)
of the Hindus. Alamín (plur.), never Alamayn (dual), is the
Triregno denoted by the papal Tiara, the three Christian kingdoms
being Heaven, Hell and Purgatory.

[FN#415] Matrahinna or Mit-Rahinah is a well-known village near
Memphis, the name being derived from the old Egyptian Minat-ro-
hinnu, the port at the mouth of the canal. Let me remark that two
of these three words, "Minat" and "Ru," are still common in "
Aryan" Persian.

[FN#416] Kirámat, a sign, a prodigy, opposed to Mu'ujizah, a
miracle wrought by a prophet. The Sufis explain this thaumaturgy by
Allah changing something of Nature's ordinary course in favour of
an especial worshipper, and, after a fashion, this is Catholic
doctrine (See Dabistan, iii. 173).

[FN#417] Koran, x. 25, "until the earth receive its vesture and be
adorned with various plants."

[FN#418] i.e. the young hair sprouting on the boy's cheek.

[FN#419] A fighter for the faith and now a title which follows the
name, e.g. Osmán Páshá Ghází, whom the English press dubbed "Ghazi
Osman."

[FN#420] That is the King of Constantinople.

[FN#421] Cassia fistularis, a kind of carob: " Shambar" is the
Arab. form of the Persian " Chambar."

[FN#422] Koran, ii. 149. Hence the vulgar idea that Martyrs are
still alive in the flesh. See my Pilgrimage (ii. 110 and elsewhere)
for the romantic and picturesque consequences of that belief. The
Commentators (Jalál al-Dín, etc.) play tricks with the Koranic
words, " they (martyrs) are not dead but living" (iii. 179) by
placing the happy souls in the crops of green birds which eat of
the fruits and drink of the waters of Paradise; whereas the
reprobates and the (very) wicked are deposited in black birds which
drain the sanies and the boiling waters of Hell. Amongst the Greeks
a body remaining entire long after death suggests Anathema
Maranatha: it is the contrary with Catholic Christians (Boccaccio
iv. 5, of the Pot of Basil). Concerning this creed see Maundrell,
Letter of 1698.

[FN#423] Tor is "Mount Sinai" in the Koran (xcv. 1). I have only to
repeat my opinion concerning the present site so called: "It is
evident that Jebel Serbal dates only from the early days of Coptic
Christianity; 