hty height Manaf.'[FN#185]

Then I began to abuse him and reproach him with the foulness of
his action and his lack of honour; and he was silent, never
uttering a word. But, when I had finished, he smiled and said,
'Out on thee, O fool! Thou hast entered my house and sold my
kerchief and spent my silver: so, with whom art thou wroth, O
pimp?'[FN#186] Then he left me and went away to her, whilst I
said, 'By Allah, thou art right to twit me as nincompoop and
pander!' Then I left his door and went away in sore concern, and
I feel its trace in my heart to this very day; for I never had my
will of her nor, indeed, ever heard of her more." And amongst
other tales is that about





                ISAAC OF MOSUL AND THE MERCHANT.



Quoth Ishak bin Ibrahim al Mausili, "It so chanced that, one day
feeling weary of being on duty at the Palace and in attendance
upon the Caliph, I mounted horse and went forth, at break of
dawn, having a mind to ride out in the open country and take my
pleasure. So I said to my servants, 'If there come a messenger
from the Caliph or another, say that I set out at day break, upon
a pressing business, and that ye know not whither I am gone.'
Then I fared forth alone and went round about the city, till the
sun waxed hot, when I halted in a great thoroughfare known as Al
Haram,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ishak bin
Ibrahim the Mausili continued: "When the sun waxed hot I halted
in a great thoroughfare known as Al-Haram, to take shelter in the
shade and found it in a spacious wing of a house which projected
over the street. And I stood there but a little while before
there came up a black slave, leading an ass bestridden by a
damsel; and under her were housings set with gems and pearls and
upon her were the richest of clothes, richness can go no farther;
and I saw that she was elegant of make with languorous look and
graceful mien. I asked one of the passers by who she was, and he
said, 'She is a singer,' so I fell in love with her at first
sight: hardly could I keep my seat on horseback. She entered the
house at whose gate I stood; and, as I was planning a device to
gain access to her, there came up two men young and comely who
asked admission and the housemaster gave them leave to enter. So
they alighted and I also and they entered and I with them, they
supposing that the master of the house had invited me; and we sat
awhile, till food was brought and we ate. Then they set wine
before us, and the damsel came out, with a lute in her hand. She
sang and we drank, till I rose to obey a call of nature.
Thereupon the host questioned the two others of me, and they
replied that they knew me not; whereupon quoth he, 'This is a
parasite[FN#187]; but he is a pleasant fellow, so treat him
courteously.' Then I came back and sat down in my place, whilst
the damsel sang to a pleasing air these two couplets,

     'Say to the she gazelle, who's no gazelle, *
          And Kohl'd ariel who's no ariel.[FN#188]
     Who lies with male, and yet no female is, *
          Whose gait is female most unlike the male.'

She sang it right well, and the company drank and her song
pleased them. Then she carolled various pieces to rare measures,
and amongst the rest one of mine, which consisted of this
distich,

     'Bare hills and campground desolate *
          And friends who all have ganged their gait.
     How severance after union leaves *
          Me and their homes in saddest state!'

Her singing this time was even better than the first; then she
chanted other rare pieces, old and new, and amongst them, another
of mine with the following two couplets,

     'Say to angry lover who turns away, *
          And shows thee his side whatso thou
     'Thou wroughtest all that by thee was wrought, *
          Albe 'twas haply thy sport and play.'

I prayed her to repeat the song, that I might correct it for her;
whereupon one of the two men accosted me and said, 'Never saw we
a more impudent lick platter than thou. Art thou not content with
sponging, but thou must eke meddle and muddle? Of very sooth, in
thee is the saying made true, Parasite and pushing wight.' So I
hung down my head for shame and made him no answer, whilst his
companion would have withheld him from me, but he would not be
restrained. Presently, they rose to pray, but I lagged behind a
little and, taking the lute, screwed up the sides and brought it
into perfect tune. Then I stood up in my place to pray with the
rest; and when we had ended praying, the same man fell again to
blaming me and reviling me and persisted in his rudeness, whilst
I held my peace. Thereupon the damsel took the lute and touching
it, knew that it had been altered, and said, 'Who hath touched my
lute?' Quoth they, 'None of us hath touched it.' Quoth she, 'Nay,
by Allah, some one hath touched it, and he is an artist, a past
master in the craft; for he hath arranged the strings and tuned
them like one who is a perfect performer.' Said I, 'It was I
tuned it;' and said she, 'Then, Allah upon thee, take it and play
on it!' So I took it; and, playing a piece so difficult and so
rare, that it went nigh to deaden the quick and quicken the dead,
I sang thereto these couplets,

     'I had a heart, and with it lived my life: *
          'Twas seared with fire and burnt with loving-lowe:
     I never won the blessing of her love; *
          God would not on His slave such boon bestow:
     If what I've tasted be the food of Love, *
          Must taste it all men who love food would know.'"

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ishak of
Mosul thus continued: "Now when I had finished my verse, there
was not one of the company but sprang from his place and sat down
like schoolboys before me, saying, 'Allah upon thee, O our lord,
sing us another song.' 'With pleasure,' said I, and playing
another measure in masterly fashion, sang thereto these couplets,

'Ho thou whose heart is melted down by force of Amor's fire, *    
     And griefs from every side against thy happiness conspire:
Unlawful is that he who pierced my vitals with his shaft, * My
     blood between my midriff and my breast bone[FN#189] he
     desire, 
'Twas plain, upon our severance day, that he had set his mind *
     On an eternal parting, moved by tongue of envious liar: 
He sheds my blood he ne'er had shed except by wound of love, *
     Will none demand my blood of him, my wreck of him require?'

When I had made an end of this song, there was not one of them
but rose to his feet and threw himself upon the ground for excess
of delight. Then I cast the lute from my hand, but they said,
'Allah upon thee, do not on this wise, but let us hear another
song, so Allah Almighty increase thee of His bounty!' Replied I,
'O folk, I will sing you another song and another and another and
will tell you who I am. I am Ishak bin Ibrahim al Mausili, and by
Allah, I bear myself proudly to the Caliph when he seeketh me. Ye
have today made me hear abuse from an unmannerly carle such as I
loathe; and by Allah, I will not speak a word nor sit with you,
till ye put yonder quarrelsome churl out from among you!' Quoth
the fellow's companion to him, 'This is what I warned thee
against, fearing for thy good name.' So they hent him by the hand
and thrust him out; and I took the lute and sang over again the
songs of my own composing which the damsel had sung. Then I
whispered the host that she had taken my heart and that I had no
patience to abstain from her. Quoth he 'She is thine on one
condition.' I asked, 'What is that?' and he answered, 'It is that
thou abide with me a month, when the damsel and all belonging to
her of raiment and jewellery shall be thine.' I rejoined, 'It is
well, I will do this.' So I tarried with him a whole month,
whilst none knew where I was and the Caliph sought me everywhere,
but could come by no news of me; and at the end of this time, the
merchant delivered to me the damsel, together with all that
pertained to her of things of price and an eunuch to attend upon
her. So I brought all that to my lodging, feeling as I were lord
of the whole world, for exceeding delight in her; then I rode
forthright to Al-Maamun. And when I stood in the presence, he
said, 'Woe to thee, O Ishak, where hast thou been?' So I
acquainted him with the story and he said, 'Bring me that man at
once.' Thereupon I told him where he lived and he sent and
fetched him and questioned him of the case; when he repeated the
story and the Caliph said to him, 'Thou art a man of right
generous mind, and it is only fitting that thou be aided in thy
generosity.' Then he ordered him an hundred thousand dirhams and
said to me, 'O Ishak, bring the damsel before me.' So I brought
her to him, and she sang and delighted him; and being greatly
gladdened by her he said to me, 'I appoint her turn of service
every Thursday, when she must come and sing to me from behind the
curtain.' And he ordered her fifty thousand dirhams, so by Allah,
I profited both myself and others by my ride." And amongst the
tales they tell is one of





                 THE THREE UNFORTUNATE LOVERS.



Quoth Al-'Utbi[FN#190], "I was sitting one day with a company of
educated men, telling stories of the folk, when the talk turned
upon legends of lovers and each of us said his say thereanent.
Now there was in our company an old man, who remained silent,
till all had spoken and had no more to say, when quoth he, 'Shall
I tell you a thing, the like of which you never heard; no,
never?' 'Yes,' quoth we; and he said, 'Know, then, that I had a
daughter, who loved a youth, but we knew it not; while the youth
loved a singing girl, who in her turn loved my daughter. One day,
I was present at an assembly, wherein were also the youth'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh
continued: 'One day, I was present at an assembly wherein were
also the youth and the singing girl and she chanted to us these
couplets,

     'Prove how Love bringeth low * Lover those tears that run 
     Lowering him still the more * When pity finds he none.'

Cried the youth, 'By Allah, thou hast said well, O my mistress.'
Dost thou incite me to die?' Answered the girl from behind the
curtain, 'Yes, if thou be a true lover.' So he laid his head on a
cushion and closed his eyes; and when the cup came round to him,
we shook him and behold, he was dead.[FN#191] Therewith we all
flocked to him, and our pleasure was troubled and we grieved and
broke up at once. When I came home, my people took in bad part my
returning before the appointed time, and I told them what had
befallen the youth, thinking that thereby I should greatly
surprise them. My daughter heard my words and rising, went from
the sitting chamber into another, whither I followed her and
found her lying with her head on a cushion, even as I had told of
the young man. So I shook her and lo! she was dead. Then we laid
her out and set forth next morning to bury her, whilst the
friends of the young man set forth in like guise to bury him. As
we were on the way to the burial place, we met a third funeral
and asking whose it was, were told that it was that of the
singing girl who, hearing of my daughter's death, had done even
as she did and was dead. So we buried them all three on one day,
and this is the rarest tale that ever was heard of lovers." And
they also tell a tale of





                   HOW ABU HASAN BRAKE WIND.



They recount that in the City Kaukaban of Al-Yaman there was a
man of the Fazli tribe who had left Badawi life, and become a
townsman for many years and was a merchant of the most opulent
merchants. His wife had deceased when both were young; and his
friends were instant with him to marry again, ever quoting to him
the words of the poet,

     "Go, gossip! re-wed thee, for Prime draweth near:
      A wife is an almanac--good for the year."

So being weary of contention, Abu Hasan entered into negotiations
with the old women who procure matches, and married a maid like
Canopus when he hangeth over the seas of Al-Hind. He made high
festival therefor, bidding to the wedding banquet kith and kin,
Olema and Fakirs; friends and foes and all his acquaintances of
that countryside. The whole house was thrown open to feasting:
there were rices of five several colours, and sherbets of as many
more; and kids stuffed with walnuts and almonds and pistachios
and a camel colt[FN#192] roasted whole. So they ate and drank and
made mirth and merriment; and the bride was displayed in her
seven dresses and one more, to the women, who could not take
their eyes off her. At last, the bridegroom was summoned to the
chamber where she sat enthroned; and he rose slowly and with
dignity from his divan; but in so doing, for that he was over
full of meat and drink, lo and behold! he let fly a fart, great
and terrible. Thereupon each guest turned to his neighbour and
talked aloud and made as though he had heard nothing, fearing for
his life. But a consuming fire was lit in Abu Hasan's heart; so
he pretended a call of nature; and, in lieu of seeking the bride
chamber, he went down to the house court and saddled his mare and
rode off, weeping bitterly, through the shadow of the night. In
time he reached Lahej where he found a ship ready to sail for
India; so he shipped on board and made Calicut of Malabar. Here
he met with many Arabs, especially Hazramis[FN#193], who
recommended him to the King; and this King (who was a Kafir)
trusted him and advanced him to the captainship of his body
guard. He remained ten years in all solace and delight of life;
at the end of which time he was seized with home sickness; and
the longing to behold his native land was that of a lover pining
for his beloved; and he came near to die of yearning desire. But
his appointed day had not dawned; so, after taking the first bath
of health, he left the King without leave, and in due course
landed at Makalla of Hazramaut. Here he donned the rags of a
religious; and, keeping his name and case secret, fared for
Kaukaban afoot; enduring a thousand hardships of hunger, thirst
and fatigue; and braving a thousand dangers from the lion, the
snake and the Ghul. But when he drew near his old home, he looked
down upon it from the hills with brimming eyes, and said in
himself, "Haply they might know thee; so I will wander about the
outskirts, and hearken to the folk. Allah grant that my case be
not remembered by them!" He listened carefully for seven nights
and seven days, till it so chanced that, as he was sitting at the
door of a hut, he heard the voice of a young girl saying, "O my
mother, tell me the day when I was born; for such an one of my
companions is about to take an omen[FN#194] for me." And the
mother answered, "Thou was born, O my daughter, on the very night
when Abu Hasan farted." Now the listener no sooner heard these
words than he rose up from the bench, and fled away saying to
himself, "Verily thy fart hath become a date, which shall last
for ever and ever; even as the poet said,

     'As long as palms shall shift the flower; *
          As long as palms shall sift the flour.'[FN#195]

And he ceased not travelling and voyaging and returned to India;
and there abode in self exile till he died; and the mercy of
Allah be upon him![FN#196] And they tell another story of





                  THE LOVERS OF THE BANU TAYY.



Kasim, son of Adi, was wont to relate that a man of the Banu
Tamim spake as follows: "I went out one day in search of an
estray and, coming to the waters of the Banu Tayy, saw two
companies of people near one another, and behold, those of one
company were disputing among themselves even as the other. So I
watched them and observed, in one of the companies, a youth
wasted with sickness, as he were a worn-out dried-up waterskin.
And as I looked on him, lo! he repeated these couplets,

     'What ails the Beauty she returneth not? *
          Is't Beauty's irk or grudging to my lot?
     I sickened and my friends all came to call; *
          What stayed thee calling with the friendly knot?
     Hadst thou been sick, I had come running fast *
          To thee, nor threats had kept me from the spot:
     Mid them I miss thee, and I lie alone; *
          Sweetheart, to lose thy love sad loss I wot!'

His words were heard by a damsel in the other company who
hastened towards him, and when her people followed her, she
fought them off. Then the youth caught sight of her and sprang up
and ran towards her, whilst the people of his party ran after him
and laid hold of him. However he haled and freed himself from
them, and she in like manner loosed herself; and, when they were
free, each ran to other and meeting between the two parties,
embraced and fell dead upon the ground."--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred ante Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the young
man and the maid met between the two parties and embraced and
both fell dead upon the ground; whereat came there out an old man
from one of the tents and stood over them exclaiming, 'Verily, we
are Allah's and unto Him we are returning!' Then weeping sore he
said, 'Allah have ruth on you both! by the Almighty, though you
were not united in your lives, I will at least unite you after
your deaths.' And he bade lay them out: so they washed them and
shrouded them in one shroud and dug for them one grave and prayed
one prayer over them both and buried them in one tomb; nor was
there man or woman in the two parties but I saw weeping over them
and buffeting their faces. Then I questioned the Shaykh of them,
and he said, 'She was my daughter and he my brother's son; and
love brought them to the pass thou seest.' I exclaimed, 'Allah
amend thee! but why didst thou not marry them to each other?'
Quoth he, 'I feared shame[FN#197] and dishonour; and now I am
fallen into both.' " And they tell a tale of




                         THE MAD LOVER.



Quoth Abu 'l-Abbas al-Mubarrad,[FN#198] "I set out one day with a
company to Al-Barid on an occasion and, coming to the monastery
of Hirakl,[FN#199] we alighted in its shade. Presently a man came
out to us and said, 'There are madmen in the monastery,[FN#200]
and amongst them one who speaketh wisdom; if ye saw him, ye would
marvel at his speech.' So we arose all and went into the
monastery' where we saw a man seated on a skin mat in one of the
cells, with bare head and eyes intently fixed upon the wall. We
saluted him, and he returned our salaam, without looking at us,
and one said to us, 'Repeat some verses to him; for, when he
heareth verse, he speaketh.' So I repeated these two couplets,

     'O best of race to whom gave Hawwa[FN#201] boon of birth, *
          Except for thee the world were neither sweet nor fair!
     Thou'rt he, whose face, by Allah shown to man, *
          Doth ward off death, decay and hoary hair.'

When he heard from me this praise of the Apostle he turned
towards us and repeated these lines,

     'Well Allah wotteth I am sorely plagued: *
          Nor can I show my pain to human sight.
     Two souls have I, one soul is here contained, *
          While other woneth in another site.
     Meseems the absent soul's like present soul, *
          And that she suffers what to me is dight.'

Then he asked us. 'Have I said well or said ill? And we answered,
'Thou hast said the clean contrary of ill, well and right well.'
Then he put out his hand to a stone, that was by him and took it
up; whereupon thinking he would throw it at us we fled from him;
but he fell to beating upon his breast therewith violent blows
and said to us, 'Fear not, but draw near and hear somewhat from
me and receive it from me.' So we came back, and he repeated
these couplets,

'When they made their camels yellow white kneel down at dawning
     grey * They mounted her on crupper and the camel went his
     way,
Mine eye balls through the prison wall beheld them, and I cried *
     With streaming eyelids and a heart that burnt in dire dismay
O camel driver turn thy beast that I farewell my love! * In
     parting and farewelling her I see my doomed day
I'm faithful to my vows of love which I have never broke, * Would
     Heaven I kenned what they have done with vows that vowed
     they!'

Then he looked at me and said, 'Say me, dost thou know what they
did?'[FN#202] Answered I, 'Yes, they are dead; Almighty Allah
have mercy on them!' At this his face changed and he sprang to
his feet and cried out, 'How knowest thou they be dead?;' and I
replied, 'Were they alive they had not left thee thus.' Quoth he,
'By Allah, thou art right, and I care not to live after them.'
Then his side muscles quivered and he fell on his face; and we
ran up to him and shook him and found him dead, the mercy of the
Almighty be on him! At this we marvelled and mourned for him and,
sore mourning, laid him out and buried him".--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Four Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that al-Mubarrad
thus continued: "When the man fell we mourned over him with sore
mourning and laid him out and buried him. And when I returned to
Baghdad and went in to the Caliph al-Mutawakkil, he saw the trace
of tears on my face and said to me, 'What is this?' So I told him
what had passed and it was grievous to him and he cried, 'What
moved thee to deal thus with him?[FN#203] By Allah, if I thought
thou didst not repent it and regret him I would punish thee
therefor!' And he mourned for him the rest of the day." And
amongst the tales they tell is one of





                 THE PRIOR WHO BECAME A MOSLEM.



Quoth Abu Bakr Mohammed ibn Al-Anbari[FN#204]: "I once left Anbar
on a journey to 'Amuriyah,[FN#205] where there came out to me the
prior of the monastery and superior of the monkery, Abd al-Masih
hight, and brought me into the building. There I found forty
religious, who entertained me that night with fair guest rite,
and I left them after seeing among them such diligence in
adoration and devotion as I never beheld the like of in any
others. Next day I farewelled them and fared forth and, after
doing my business at 'Amuriyah, I returned to my home at Anbar.
And next year I made pilgrimage to Meccah and as I was
circumambulating the Holy House I saw Abd al-Masih the monk also
compassing the Ka'abah, and with him five of his fellows, the
shavelings. Now when I was sure that it was indeed he, I accosted
him, saying, 'Art thou not Abd al-Masih, the Religious?' and he
replied, 'Nay, I am Abdallah, the Desirous.'[FN#206] Therewith I
fell to kissing his grey hairs and shedding tears; then, taking
him by the hand, I led him aside into a corner of the Temple and
said to him, 'Tell me the cause of thy conversion to al-Islam;'
and he made reply, 'Verily, 'twas a wonder of wonders, and befell
thus. A company of Moslem devotees came to the village wherein is
our convent, and sent a youth to buy them food. He saw, in the
market, a Christian damsel selling bread, who was of the fairest
of women; and he was struck at first sight with such love of her,
that his senses failed him and he fell on his face in a fainting
fit. When he revived, he returned to his companions and told them
what had befallen him, saying, 'Go ye about your business; I may
not go with you.' They chided him and exhorted him, but he paid
no heed to them; so they left him whilst he entered the village
and seated himself at the door of the woman's booth.[FN#207] She
asked him what he wanted, and he told her that he was in love
with her whereupon she turned from him; but he abode in his place
three days without tasting food, keeping his eyes fixed on her
face. Now whenas she saw that he departed not from her, she went
to her people and acquainted them with his case, and they set on
him the village boys, who stoned him and bruised his ribs and
broke his head; but, for all this, he would not budge. Then the
villagers took counsel together to slay him; but a man of them
came to me and told me of his case, and I went out to him and
found him lying prostrate on the ground. So I wiped the blood
from his face and carried him to the convent, and dressed his
wounds; and there he abode with me fourteen days. But as soon as
he could walk, he left the monastery"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdallah
the Religious continued: "So I carried him to the convent and
dressed his wounds, and he abode with me fourteen days. But as
soon as he could walk, he left the monastery and returned to the
door of the woman 's booth, where he sat gazing on her as before.
When she saw him she came out to him and said, 'By Allah thou
movest me to pity! wilt thou enter my faith that I may marry
thee?' He cried, 'Allah forbid that I should put off the faith of
Unity and enter that of Plurality!'[FN#208] Quoth she, 'Come in
with me to my house and take thy will of me and wend thy ways in
peace.' Quoth he, 'Not so, I will not waste the worship of twelve
years for the lust of an eye-twinkle.' Said she, 'Then depart
from me forthwith;' and he said, 'My heart will not suffer me to
do that;' whereupon she turned her countenance from him.
Presently the boys found him out and began to pelt him with
stones; and he fell on his face, saying, 'Verily, Allah is my
protector, who sent down the Book of the Koran; and He protecteth
the Righteous![FN#209] At this I sallied forth and driving away
the boys, lifted his head from the ground and heard him say,
'Allah mine, unite me with her in Paradise!' Then I carried him
to the monastery, but he died, before I could reach it, and I
bore him without the village and I dug for him a grave and buried
him. And next night when half of it was spent, the damsel cried
with a great cry (and she in her bed); so the villagers flocked
to her and questioned her of her case. Quoth she, 'As I slept,
behold the Moslem man came in to me and taking me by the hand,
carried me to the gate of Paradise; but the Guardian denied me
entrance, saying, 'Tis forbidden to unbelievers.' So I embraced
Al Islam at his hands and, entering with him, beheld therein
pavilions and trees, such as I cannot describe to you. Moreover,
he brought me to a pavilion of jewels and said to me, 'Of a truth
this is my pavilion and thine, nor will I enter it save with
thee; but, after five nights thou shalt be with me therein, if it
be the will of Allah Almighty.' Then he put forth his hand to a
tree which grew at the door of the pavilion and plucked there
from two apples and gave them to me, saying, 'Eat this and keep
the other, that the monks may see it.' So I ate one of them and
never tasted I aught sweeter.' "--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the woman
continued: "'So he plucked two apples and gave them to me,
saying, 'Eat this and keep the other that the monks may see it.'
So I ate one of them and never tasted I aught sweeter. Then he
took my hand and fared forth and carried me back to my house;
and, when I awoke, I found the taste of the apple in my mouth and
the other in my hand.' So saying she brought out the apple, and
in the darkness of the night it shone as it were a sparkling
star. So they carried her (and the apple with her) to the
monastery, where she repeated her vision and showed it to us;
never saw we its like among all the fruits of the world. Then I
took a knife and cut the apple into pieces according as we were
folk in company; and never knew we aught more delicious than its
savour nor more delightsome than its scent; but we said, 'Haply
this was a devil that appeared unto her to seduce her from her
faith.' Thereupon her people took her and went away; but she
abstained from eating and drinking and on the fifth night she
rose from her bed, and going forth the village to the grave of
her Moslem lover threw herself upon it and died, her family not
knowing what was come of her. But, on the morrow, there came to
the village two Moslem elders, clad in hair cloth, and with them
two women in like garb, and said, 'O people of the village, with
you is a woman Saint, a Waliyah of the friends of Allah, who died
a Moslemah; and we will take charge of her in lieu of you.' So
the villagers sought her and found her dead on the Moslem's
grave; and they said, 'This was one of us and she died in our
faith; so we will take charge of her.' Rejoined the two old men,
'Nay, she died a Moslemah and we claim her.' And the dispute
waxed to a quarrel between them, till one of the Shaykhs said,
'Be this the test of her faith: the forty monks of the monastery
shall come and try to lift her from the grave. If they succeed,
then she died a Nazarene; if not, one of us shall come and lift
her up and if she be lifted by him, she died a Moslemah.' The
villagers agreed to this and fetched the forty monks, who
heartened one another, and came to her to lift her, but could
not. Then we tied a great rope round her middle and haled at it;
but the rope broke in sunder, and she stirred not; and the
villagers came and did the like, but could not move her from her
place.[FN#210] At last, when all means failed, we said to one of
the two Shaykhs, 'Come thou and lift her.' So he went up to the
grave and, covering her with his mantle, said, 'In the name of
Allah the Compassionating, the Compassionate, and of the Faith of
the Apostle of Allah, on whom be prayers and peace!' Then he
lifted her and, taking her in his bosom, betook himself with her
to a cave hard by, where they laid her, and the two women came
and washed her and shrouded her. Then the two elders bore her to
her Moslem lover's grave and prayed over her and buried her by
his side and went their ways. Now we were eye witnesses of all
this; and, when we were alone with one another, we said, 'In
sooth, the truth is most worthy to be followed;'[FN#211] and
indeed the verity hath been made manifest to us, nor is there a
proof more patent of the truth of al-Islam than that we have seen
this day with our eyes.' So I and all the monks became Moslems
and on like wise did the villagers; and we sent to the people of
Mesopotamia for a doctor of the law, to instruct us in the
ordinances of al-Islam and the canons of the Faith. They sent us
a learned man and a pious, who taught us the rites of prayer and
the tenets of the faith; and we are now in ease abounding; so to
Allah be the praise and the thanks!" And they also tell a tale of





            THE LOVES OF ABU ISA AND KURRAT AL-AYN.



Quoth Amru bin Masa'dah:[FN#212] "Abu Isa, son of al-Rashid and
brother to al-Maamun, was enamoured of one Kurrat al-Ayn, a slave
girl belonging to Ali bin Hisham,[FN#213] and she also loved him;
but he concealed his passion, complaining of it to none neither
discovering his secret to anyone, of his pride and magnanimity;
for he had used his utmost endeavour to purchase her of her
master, but he had failed. At last when his patience was at an
end and his passion was sore on him and he was helpless in the
matter, he went in to al-Maamun, one day of state after the folk
had retired, and said to him, 'O Commander of the Faithful, if
thou wilt this day make trial of thine Alcaydes by taking them
unawares, thou wilt know the generous from the mean and note each
one's place, after the quality of his mind.' But, in saying this
he purposed only to sit with Kurrat al-Ayn in her lord's house.
Quoth al-Maamun, 'Right is thy recking,' and bade make ready a
barge, called 'the Flyer,' wherein he embarked with Abu Isa and a
party of his chief officers. The first mansion he visited
unexpectedly was that of Hamid al-Tawil of Tus, whom he found
seated"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that al-Maamun
embarked with his chief officers and fared on till they reached
the mansion of Hamid al-Tawil of Tus; and, unexpectedly entering
they found him seated on a mat and before him singers and players
with lutes and flageolets and other instruments of music in their
hands. So Al Maamun sat with him awhile and presently he set
before him dishes of nothing but flesh meat, with no birds among
them. The Caliph would not taste thereof and Abu Isa said to him,
"O Commander of the Faithful, we have taken the owner of this
place unawares, and he knew not of thy coming; but now let us go
to another place which is prepared for thee and fitted for thee."
Thereupon the Caliph arose and betook himself with his brother
Abu Isa and his suite, to the abode of Ali son of Hisham who, on
hearing of their approach, came out and received them with the
goodliest of reception, and kissed the earth before the King.
Then he brought them into his mansion and opened to them a saloon
than which seer never saw a goodlier. Its floors, pillars and
walls were of many coloured marbles, adorned with Greek
paintings: and it was spread with matting of Sind[FN#214] whereon
were carpets and tapestry of Bassorah make, fitted to the length
and breadth of the room. So the Caliph sat awhile, examining the
house and its ceilings and walls, then said, "Give us somewhat to
eat." So they brought him forthwith nearly an hundred dishes of
poultry besides other birds and brewises, fritters and cooling
marinades. When he had eaten, he said, "Give us some thing to
drink, O Ali;" and the host set before him, in vessels of gold
and silver and crystal, raisin wine boiled down to one third with
fruits and spices; and the cupbearers were pages like moons, clad
in garments of Alexandrian stuff interwoven with gold and bearing
on their breasts beakers of crystal, full of rose water mingled
with musk. So al-Maamun marvelled with exceeding marvel at all he
saw and said, "Ho thou, Abu al-Hasan!" Whereupon Ali sprang to
the Caliph's carpet and kissing it, said, "At thy service, O
Commander of the Faithful!" and stood before him. Quoth
al-Maamun, "Let us hear some pleasant and merry song." Replied
Ali, "I hear and obey, O Commander of the Faithful," and said to
one of his eunuchs, "Fetch the singing women." So the slave went
out and presently returned, followed by ten castratos, bearing
ten stools of gold, which they set down in due order; and after
these came ten damsels, concubines of the master, as they were
shining full moons or gardens full of bloom, clad in black
brocade, with crowns of gold on their heads; and they passed
along the room till they sat down on the stools, when sang they
sundry songs. Al-Maamun looked at one of them; and, being
captivated by her elegance and fair favour, asked her, "What is
thy name, O damsel?"; and she answered, "My name is
Sajahi,[FN#215] O Commander of the Faithful," and he said, "Sing
to us, O Sajahi!" So she played a lively measure and sang these
couplets,

     "I walk, for fear of interview, the weakling's walk *
          Who sees two lion whelps the fount draw nigh:
     My cloak acts sword, my heart's perplex'd with fright, *
          Lest jealous hostile eyes th' approach descry:
     Till sudden hapt I on a delicate maid *
          Like desert-doe that fails her fawns to espy."

Quoth the Caliph, "Thou hast done well, O damsel! whose are these
lines?" She answered, "Written by Amru bin Ma'di Karib al
-Zubaydi,[FN#216] and the air is Ma'abid's."[FN#217] Then the
Caliph and Abu Isa and Ali drank and the damsels went away and
were succeeded by other ten, all clad in flowered silk of
Al-Yaman, brocaded with gold, who sat down on the chairs and sang
various songs. The Caliph looked at one of the concubines, who
was like a wild heifer of the waste, and said to her, "What is
thy name, O damsel?" She replied, "My name is Zabiyah,[FN#218] 0
Commander of the Faithful;" and he, "Sing to us Zabiyah;" so she
warbled like a bird with many a trill and sang these two
couplets,

     "Houris, and highborn Dames who feel no fear of men, *
          Like Meccan game forbidden man to slam:[FN#219]
     Their soft sweet voices make you deem them whores, *
          But bars them from all whoring Al-Islam."

When she had finished, al-Maamun cried, "favoured of Allah art
thou!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
slave girl finished her song, al-Maamun cried, "Favoured of Allah
art thou! Whose is this verse?" and she answered,
"Jarir's[FN#220] and the air is By Ibn Surayj." Then the Caliph
and his company drank, whilst the girls went away and there came
forth yet other ten, as they were rubies, robed in red brocade
inwoven with gold and purfled with pearls and jewels whilst all
their heads were bare. They sat down on the stools and sang
various airs; so the Caliph looked at one of them, who was like
the sun of the day, and asked her, "What is thy name, O damsel?";
and she answered, "O Commander of the Faithful, my name is
Fatin." "Sing to us, O Fatin," quoth he; whereat she played a
lively measure and sang these couplets,

     "Deign grant thy favours; since 'tis time I were engraced; *
          Tnough of severance hath it been my lot to taste.
     Thou'rt he whose face cloth every gift and charm unite, *
          Yet is my patience spent for that 'twas sore misplaced:
     I've wasted life in loving thee; and would high Heaven *
          Grant me one meeting hour for all this wilful waste."

"Well sung, O Fatin!'' exclaimed the Caliph; "whose verse is
this?" And she answered, "Adi bin Zayd's, and the air is
antique." Then all three drank, whilst the damsels retired and
were succeeded by other ten maidens, as they were sparkling
stars, clad in flowered silk embroidered with red gold and girt
with jewelled zones. They sat down and sang various motives; and
the Caliph asked one of them, who was like a wand of willow,
"What is thy name, O damsel?"; and she answered, "My name is
Rashaa,[FN#221] 0 Commander of the Faithful." "Sing to us, O
Rashaa," quoth he; so she played a lively measure and sang these
couplets,

     "And wand-like Houri, who can passion heal *
          Like young gazelle that paceth o'er the plain:
     I drain this wine cup on the toast, her cheek, *
          Each cup disputing till she bends in twain
     Then sleeps the night with me, the while I cry *
          'This is the only gain my Soul would gain!' "

Said the Caliph, "Well done, O damsel! Sing us something more."
So she rose and kissing the ground before him, sang the following
distich,

     "She came out to gaze on the bridal at ease *
          In a shift that reeked of ambergris."

The Caliph was highly pleased with this couplet and, when the
slave girl saw how much it delighted him, she repeated it several
times. Then said al-Maamun, "Bring up 'the Flyer,'" being minded
to embark and depart: but Ali bin Hisham said to him, "O
Commander of the Faithful, I have a slave girl, whom I bought for
ten thousand diners; she hath taken my heart in whole and part,
and I would fain display her to the Commander of the Faithful. If
she please him and he will accept of her, she is his: and if not,
let him hear something from her." Said the Caliph, "Bring her to
me;" and forth came a damsel, as she were a branchlet of willow,
with seducing eyes and eyebrows set like twin bows; and on her
head she wore a crown of red gold crusted with pearls and
jewelled, under which was a fillet bearing this couplet wrought
in letters of chrysolite,

     "A Jinniyah this, with her Jinn, to show *
          How to pierce man's heart with a stringless bow!"

The handmaiden walked, with the gait of a gazelle in flight and
fit to damn a devotee, till she came to a chair, whereon she
seated herself.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the hand
maiden walked with the gait of a gazelle in flight, fit to damn a
devotee, till she came to a chair whereon she seated herself. And
Al-Maamun marvelled at her beauty and loveliness; but, when Abu
Isa saw her, his heart throbbed with pain, his colour changed to
pale and wan and he was in evil case. Asked the Caliph, "O Abu
Isa, what aileth thee to change thus?"; and he answered, "O
Commander of the Faithful, it is because of a twitch that seizeth
me betimes." Quoth the Caliph, "Hast thou known yonder damsel
before to day?" Quoth he, "Yes, O Commander of the Faithful, can
the moon be concealed?" Then said al-Maamun to her, "What is thy
name, O damsel?"; and she replied, "My name is Kurrat al-Ayn. O
Commander of the Faithful," and he rejoined, "Sing to us, O
Kurrat al-Ayn." So she sang these two couplets,

     "The loved ones left thee in middle night, *
          And fared with the pilgrims when dawn shone bright:
     The tents of pride round the domes they pitched, *
          And with broidered curtains were veiled fro' sight."

Quoth the Caliph, "Favoured of Heaven art thou, O Kurrat al-Ayn!
Whose song is that?"; whereto she answered "The words are by
Di'ibil al-Khuza'i, and the air by Zurzur al-Saghir." Abu Isa
looked at her and his tears choked him; so that the company
marvelled at him. Then she turned to al-Maamun and said to him,
"O Commander of the Faithful, wilt thou give me leave to change
the words?" Said he, "Sing what thou wilt;" so she played a merry
measure and carolled these couplets,

     "If thou should please a friend who pleaseth thee *
          Frankly, in public practise secrecy.
     And spurn the slanderer's tale, who seldom[FN#222] *
          seeks Except the severance of true love to see.
     They say, when lover's near, he tires of love, *
          And absence is for love best remedy:
     Both cures we tried and yet we are not cured, *
          Withal we judge that nearness easier be:
     Yet nearness is of no avail when he *
          Thou lovest lends thee love unwillingly."

But when she had finished, Abu Isa said, "O Commander of the
Faithful," --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kurrat
al-Ayn had finished her verse, Abu Isa said, "O Commander of the
Faithful, though we endure disgrace, we shall be at ease.[FN#223]
Dost thou give me leave to reply to her?" Quoth the Caliph, "Yes,
say what thou wilt to her." So he swallowed his tears and sang
these two distichs,

     "Silent I woned and never owned my love; *
          But from my heart I hid love's blissful boon;
     Yet, if my eyes should manifest my love, *
          'Tis for my nearness to the shining moon."

Then Kurrat al-Ayn took the lute and played a lively tune and
rejoined with these couplets,

     "An what thou claimest were the real truth, *
          With only Hope content thou hadst not been
     Nor couldest patient live without the girl *
          So rare of inner grace and outward mien.
     But there is nothing in the claim of thee *
          At all, save tongue and talk that little mean."

When Abu Isa heard this he fell to weeping and wailing and
evidencing his trouble and anguish. Then he raised his eyes to
her and sighing, repeated these couplets,

     "Under my raiment a waste body lies, *
          And in my spirit all comprising prize.
     I have a heart, whose pain shall aye endure, *
          And tears like torrents pour these woeful eyes.
     Whene'er a wise man spies me, straight he chides *
          Love, that misleads me thus in ways unwise:
     O Lord, I lack the power this dole to bear: *
          Come sudden Death or joy in bestest guise!"

When he had ended, Ali bin Hisham sprang up and kissing his feet,
said, "O my lord, Allah hearing thy secret hath answered thy
prayer and consenteth to thy taking her with all she hath of
things rare and fair, so the Commander of the Faithful have no
mind to her." Quoth Al Maamun, "Had we a mind to her, we would
prefer Abu Isa before ourselves and help him to his desire." So
saying, he rose and embarking, went away, whilst Abu Isa tarried
for Kurrat al-Ayn, whom he took and carried to his own house, his
breast swelling with joy. See then the generosity of Ali son of
Hisham! And they tell a tale of





             AL-AMIN SON OF AL-RASHID AND HIS UNCLE
                     IBRAHIM BIN AL-MAHDI.



Al-Amin,[FN#224] brother of al-Maamun, once entered the house of
his uncle Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi, where he saw a slave girl playing
upon the lute; and, she being one of the fairest of women, his
heart inclined to her. Ibrahim, seeing how it was with him, sent
the girl to him, with rich raiment and precious ornaments. When
he saw her, he thought that his uncle had lain with her; so he
was loath to have to do with her, because of that, and accepting
what came with her sent her back to Ibrahim. His uncle learnt the
cause of this from one of al-Amin's eunuchs; so he took a shift
of watered silk and worked upon its skirt, in letters of gold,
these two couplets,

     "No! I declare by Him to whom all bow, *
          Of nothing 'neath her petticoat I trow:
     Nor meddle with her mouth; nor aught did I *
          But see and hear her, and it was enow!"

Then he clad her in the shift and, giving her a lute, sent her
back again to his nephew. When she came into al-Amin's presence,
she kissed ground before him and tuning the lute, sang thereto
these two couplets,

     "Thy breast thou baredst sending back the gift; *
          Showing unlove for me withouten shift:
     An thou bear spite of Past, the Past forgive, *
          And for the Caliphate cast the Past adrift."

When she had made an end of her verse, Al-Amin looked at her and,
seeing what was upon her skirt, could no longer control him self,
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Al-Amin looked at the damsel and saw what was upon her skirt, he
could no longer control himself, but drew near unto her and
kissed her and appointed her a separate lodging in his palace.
Moreover, he thanked his uncle for this and bestowed on him the
government of Rayy. And a tale is told of





               AL-FATH BIN KHAKAN AND THE CALIPH
                         AL-MUTAWAKKIL.



Al-Mutawakkil[FN#225] was once taking medicine, and folk sent him
by way of solace all sorts of presents and rarities and things
costly and precious. Amongst others, al-Fath bin Khakan[FN#226]
sent him a virgin slave, high breasted, of the fairest among
women of her time, and with her a vase of crystal, containing
ruddy wine, and a goblet of red gold, whereon were graven in
black these couplets,

     "Since our Imam came forth from medicine, *
          Which made him health and heartiness rewin,
     There is no healing draught more sovereign *
          Than well boiled wine this golden goblet in:
     Then let him break the seal for him secured; *
          'Tis best prescription after medicine[FN#227]

Now when the damsel entered, the physician Yohanna[FN#228] was
with the Caliph, and as he read the couplets, he smiled and said,
"By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, Fath is better versed
than I in the art of healing: so let not the Prince of True
Believers gainsay his prescription." Accordingly, the Caliph
followed the recipe contained in the poetry and was made whole by
the blessing of Allah and won his every wish. And among tales
they tell is one of





            THE MAN'S DISPUTE WITH THE LEARNED WOMAN
             CONCERNING THE RELATIVE EXCELLENCE OF
                        MALE AND FEMALE.



Quoth a certain man of learning, "I never saw amongst woman kind
one wittier, and wiser, better read and by nature more generously
bred; and in manners and morals more perfected than a preacher of
the people of Baghdad, by name Sitt al-Masha'ikh.[FN#229] It
chanced that she came to Hamah city in the year of the Flight
five hundred and sixty and one[FN#230]; and there delivered
salutary exhortations to the folk from the professorial chair.
Now there used to visit her house a number of students of
divinity and persons of learning and polite letters, who would
discuss with her questions of theology and dispute with her on
controversial points. I went to her one day, with a friend of
mine, a man of years and education; and when we had taken our
seats, she set before us a dish of fruit and seated herself
behind a curtain. Now she had a brother, a handsome youth, who
stood behind us, to serve us. And when we had eaten we fell to
disputing upon points of divinity, and I propounded to her a
theological question bearing upon a difference between the Imams,
the Founders of the Four Schools. She proceeded to speak in
answer, whilst I listened; but all the while my friend fell to
looking upon her brother's face and admiring his beauties without
paying any heed to what she discoursed. Now as she was watching
him from behind the curtain; when she had made an end of her
speech, she turned to him and said, 'Methinks thou be of those
who give men the preference over women!' He replied, 'Assuredly,'
and she asked, 'And why so?'; whereto he answered, 'For that
Allah hath made the masculine worthier than the feminine,'" --And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh
replied, " 'For that Allah hath made the masculine worthier than
the feminine; and I like the excelling and mislike the excelled.'
She laughed and presently said, 'Wilt thou deal fairly with me in
debate, if I battle the matter with thee?' and he rejoined,
'Yes.' Then quoth she, 'What is the evidence of the superiority
of the male to the female?' Quoth he, 'It is of two kinds,
traditional and reasonable. The authoritative part deriveth from
the Koran and the Traditions of the Apostle. As for the first we
have the very words of Almighty Allah, 'Men shall have the
pre-eminence above women because of those advantages wherein
Allah hath caused the one of them to excel the other;[FN#231] and
again, 'If there be not two men, let there be one man and two
women;'[FN#232] and again, when treating of inheritance, 'If
there be brothers and sisters let a male have as much as the
portion of two females.'[FN#233] Thus Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!) hath in these places preferred the male over the female
and teacheth that a woman is as the half of a man, for that he is
worthier than she. As for the Sunnah traditions, is it not
reported of the Prophet (whom Allah save and assain!) that he
appointed the blood money for a woman to be half that of a man.
And as for the evidence of reason, the male is the agent and
active and the female the patient and passive.'[FN#234] Rejoined
she, 'Thou hast said well, O my lord, but, by Allah, thou hast
proved my contention with thine own lips and hast advanced
evidence which telleth against thee, and not for thee. And thus
it is: Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) preferred the male
above the female solely because of the inherent condition and
essential quality of masculinity; and in this there is no dispute
between us. Now this quality of male-hood is common to the child,
the boy, the youth, the adult and the old man; nor is there any
distinction between them in this. If, then, the superior
excellence of male masculant belong t