used when one
would impose silence upon a babbler.  The latter will shuffle off
by ejaculating "Al" and continue his chatter.  (Pilgrimage
ii.279.)

[FN#89]  Arab. "Sukat" (plur. of Saki, cupbearer, our old
"skinker"): the pure gold (tibr) is the amber-coloured wine, like
the Vino d'oro of the Libanus.

[FN#90]  That is, fair, white and read: Turkish slaves then
abounded at Baghdad.

[FN#91]  A Wady near Meccah where one of Mohammed's battles was
fought.  The line means his waist is a thread connected broad
breast and large hind quarters.

[FN#92]  Arab. "Zaura" which may mean crooked, alluding to the
well-known rib.

[FN#93]  A pun.  Bakr was the name of the eponymus chief and it
also means virgin, as in Abu Bakr.

[FN#94]  Arab. "Jami'ayn"=two cathedrals, any large (and
consequently vicious) city.

[FN#95]  Arab. "Alma," before noticed: I cannot translate
"damask-lipped" to suit European taste.

[FN#96]  Sherbet flavoured with musk or apple to cool the mouth
of "hot coppers."

[FN#97]  Arab. "In'ash" lit. raising from his bier.  The whole
tone is rollicking and slangy.

[FN#98]  i.e. In spite of himself: the phrase often occurs.

[FN#99]  Europeans usually write "Beni" for "Banu;" the oblique
for the nominative.  I prefer "Odhrah" or "Ozrah" to Udhrah;
because the Ayn before the Zal takes in pronunciation the more
open sound.

[FN#100]   Possibly meaning that they were shrouded together;
this would be opposed to Moslem sense of decorum in modern days,
but the ancient were not so squeamish.  See Night cccxi.

[FN#101]   This phase of passion in the "varium et mutabile" is
often treated of by Oriental storytellers, and not unoften seen
in real Eastern life.

[FN#102]   As has been said, "Sahib" (preceding the name not
following it as in India) is a Wazirial title in mediaeval Islam.

[FN#103]   This parapet was rendered obligatory by Moses (Deut.
xxii. 8) on account of the danger of leaving a flat roof without
garde-fou.  Eastern Christians neglect the precaution and often
lose their children by the neglect.

[FN#104]   Arab. "Lauh." A bit of thin board washed white used
for lessons as slates are amongst us, and as easily cleaned
because the inks contain no minerals.  It is a long parallelogram
with triangular ears at the short sides; and the shape must date
from ages immemorial as it is found, throughout Syria and its
adjoinings, in the oldest rock inscriptions to which the form
serves as a frame.  Hence the "abacus" or counting table derived
from the Gr.     , a slab (or in Phenician "sand"), dust or sand
in old days having been strewed on a table or tablet for school-
boys' writings and mathematical diagrams.

[FN#105]   A pre-Islamic bard and friend to Tarafah the poet of
the Suspended or "Prize Poem."  The tale is familiar to all the
Moslem East.  Tarafah's Laura was one Khaula.

[FN#106]   King of Hirah in Chaldaea, a drunken and bloodthirsty
tyrant.  When offended by the lampoons of the two poets he sent
them with litterae Bellerophontiae to the Governor of Al-Bahrayn. 
Al-Mutalammis "smelt a rat" and destroyed his charged, but
Tarafah was mutilated and buried alive, the victim of a trick
which is old as (and older than) good King David and Uriah.  Of
course neither poet could read.

[FN#107]   On this occasion, and in presence of the women only,
the groom first sees or is supposed to see the face of his wife. 
It is, I have said, the fashion for both to be greatly overcome
and to appear as if about to faint: the groom looks especially
ridiculous when so attitudinising.

[FN#108]   This leisurely operation of the "deed of kind" was
sure to be noticed; but we do not find in The Nights any allusion
to that systematic prolongatio veneris which is so much
cultivated by Moslems under the name Imsak = retention,
withholding i.e. the semen.  Yet Eastern books on domestic
medicine consist mostly of two parts; the first of general
prescriptions and the second of aphrodisiacs especially those qui
prolongent le plaisir as did the Gaul by thinking of sa pauvre
mere.  The Ananga-Ranga, by the Reverend Koka Pandit before
quoted, gives a host of recipes which are used, either externally
or internally, to hasten the paroxysm of the woman and delay the
orgasm of the man (p. 27).  Some of these are curious in the
extreme.  I heard of a Hindi who made a candle of frogs' fat and
fibre warranted to retain the seed till it burned out; it failed
notably because, relying upon it, he worked too vigorously.  The
essence of the "retaining art" is to avoid over-tension of the
muscles and to pre-occupy the brain: hence in coition Hindus will
drink sherbet, chew betel-nut and even smoke.  Europeans ignoring
the science and practice, are contemptuously compared with
village-cocks by Hindu women who cannot be satisfied, such is
their natural coldness, increased doubtless by vegetable diet and
unuse of stimulants, with less than twenty minutes.  Hence too
while thousands of Europeans have cohabited for years with and
have had families by "native women," they are never loved by
them:--at least I never heard of a case.

[FN#109]   Abu 'l Abbas al-Rakashi, a poet of the time.  The
saying became proverbial (Burckhardt's A. Proverbs No. 561) and
there are variants, e.g. The night's promise is spread with
butter that melteth when day ariseth.

[FN#110]   Koran xxvi. 5,6 or "And those who err (Arab. Al-
ghawun) follow the footsteps of the poets," etc.

[FN#111]   Half-brother of Abdullah bin al-Zubayr, the celebrated
pretender.

[FN#112]   Grand-daughter of the Caliph Abu Bakr and the most
beautiful woman of her day.

[FN#113]   The Calc. Edit. by mistake reads "Izzah."  Torrens
(notes i.-xi.) remarks "The word Ghoonj is applied to this sort
of blandishment (i.e. an affected gait), and says Burckhardt
(Prov. No. 685), "The women of Cairo flatter themselves that
their Ghoonj is superior to that of all other females in the
Levant."  But Torrens did not understand and Burckhardt would not
explain "Ghunj" except by "assumed airs" (see No. 714).  It here
means the art of moving in coition, which is especially affected,
even by modest women, throughout the East and they have many
books teaching the genial art.  In China there are professors,
mostly old women, who instruct young girls in this branch of the
gymnastic.

[FN#114]   When reciting the Fatihah (opening Koranic chapter),
the hands are held in this position as if to receive a blessing
falling from Heaven; after which both palms are passed down the
face to distribute it over the eyes and other organs of sense.

[FN#115]   The word used is "biza'at" = capital or a share in a
mercantile business.

[FN#116]  This and the following names are those of noted
traditionists of the eighth century, who derive back to Abdallah
bin Mas'ud, a "Companion of the Apostle."  The text shows the
recognised formula of ascription for quoting a "Hadis" = saying
of Mohammed; and sometimes it has to pass through half a dozen
mouths.

[FN#117]   Traditionists of the seventh and eighth centuries who
refer back to the "Father of the Kitten" (Abu Horayrah), an uncle
of the Apostle.

[FN#118]   Eastern story-books abound in these instances.  Pilpay
says in "Kalilah was Dimnah," "I am the slave of what I have
spoken and the lord of what I keep hidden."  Sa'adi follows suit,
"When thou speakest not a word, thou hast thy hand upon it; when
it is once spoken it hath laid its hand on thee."  Caxton, in the
"Dyctes, or Sayings of Philosophers" (printed in 1477) uses
almost the same words.

[FN#119]   i.e. for her husband's and her sin in using a man like
a beast.

[FN#120]   See the Second Lady's story (tantot Kadi, tantot
bandit), pp. 20-26 by my friend Yacoub Artin Pasha in the
Bulletin before quoted, series ii. No. 4 of 1883.  The sharpers'
trick is common in Eastern folk-lore, and the idea that underlies
is always metempsychosis or metamorphosis.  So, in the Kalilah wa
Dimnah (new Syriac), the three rogues persuade the ascetic that
he is leading a dog not a sheep.

[FN#121]   This is the popular prejudice and it has doubtless
saved many a reputation.  The bat is known to Moslems as the Bird
of Jesus, a legend derived by the Koran from the Gospel of
Infancy (1 chapt. xv. Hone's Apocryphal New Testament), in which
the boy Jesus amuses herself with making birds of clay and
commanding them to fly when (according to the Moslems) they
became bats.  These Apocryphal Gospels must be carefully read, if
the student would understand a number of Moslem allusions to the
Injil which no Evangel contains.

[FN#122]   Because it quibbled away out of every question, a
truly diplomatic art.

[FN#123]   This Caliph, the orthodox Abbaside of Egypt (A.D.
1261) must not be confounded with the Druze-god, the heretical
Fatimite (A.D. 996-1021).  D'Herbelot (Hakem") gives details. 
Mr. S.L. Poole (The Academy, April 26, '79) is very severe on the
slip of Mr. Payne.

[FN#124]   The beautiful name is Persian "Anushin-rawan" = Sweet
of Soul; and the glorious title of this contemporary of Mohammed
is "Al-Malik al-Adil" = the Just King.  Kisra, the Chosroe per
excellentiam, is also applied to the godly Guebre of whom every
Eastern dictionary gives details.

[FN#125]   "Sultan" is here an anachronism: I have noted that the
title was first assumed independently by Mohammed of Ghazni after
it had been conferred by the Caliph upon his father the Amir Al-
Umara (Mayor of the Palace), Sabuktagin A.D. 974.

[FN#126]   The "Sakka" or water-carrier race is peculiar in Egypt
and famed for trickery and intrigue.  Opportunity here as
elsewhere makes the thief.

[FN#127]   A famous saying of Mohammed is recorded when an
indiscretion of his young wife Ayishah was reported to him,
"There be no adultress without an adulterer (of a husband)." 
Fatimah the Apostle's daughter is supposed to have remained a
virgin after bearing many children: this coarse symbolism of
purity was known to the classics (Pausanias), who made Juno
recover her virginity by bathing in a certain river every year. 
In the last phrase, "Al-Salaf" (ancestry) refers to Mohammed and
his family.

[FN#128]  Khusrau Parwiz, grandson of Anushirwan, the Guebre King
who tore his kingdom by tearing Mohammed's letter married the
beautiful Maria or Irene (in Persian "Shirin = the sweet)
daughter of the Greek Emperor Maurice: their loves were sung by a
host of poets; and likewise the passion of the sculptor Farhad
for the same Shirin.  Mr. Lyall writes "Parwez" and holds
"Parwiz" a modern form.

[FN#129]   he could afford it according to historians.  His
throne was supported by 40,000 silver pillars; and 1,000 globes,
hung in the dome, formed an orrery, showing the motion of the
heavenly bodies; 30,000 pieces of embroidered tapestry overhung
the walls below were vaults full of silver, gold and gems.

[FN#130]   Arab.  "Khunsa," meaning also a catamite as I have
explained.  Lane (ii. 586) has it; "This fish is of a mixed
kind." (!).

[FN#131]   So the model lovers became the ordinary married
couple.

[FN#132]   Arab. "Jamm." Heb. "Yamm."  Al-Hariri (Ass. Of Sinjar
and Sawah) uses the rare form Yam for sea or ocean.

[FN#133]   Al-Hadi, immediate predecessor of Harun al-Rashid,
called "Al-Atbik": his upper lip was contracted and his father
placed a slave over him when in childhood, with orders to say,
"Musa! atbik!" (draw thy lips together) when he opened his mouth.

[FN#134]   Immediate successor of Harun al-Rashid.  Al-Amin is an
imposing physical figure, fair, tall, handsome and of immense
strength; according to Al-Mas'udi, he killed a lion with his own
hands; but his mind and judgement were weak.  He was fond of
fishing; and his reply to the courtier bringing important news,
"Confound thee! leave me! for Kausar (an eunuch whom he loved)
hath caught two fish and I none," reminds one of royal frivolity
in France.

[FN#135]   Afterwards governor in Khorasan under Al-Maamun.

[FN#136]   Intendant of the palace under Harun al-Rashid.

[FN#137]   Moslem women have this advantage over their Western
sisterhood: they can always leave the house of father or husband
and, without asking permission, pay a week or ten days' visit to
their friends.  But they are not expected to meet their lovers.

[FN#138]   The tale of "Susannah and the Elders" in Moslem form. 
Daniyal is the Arab Daniel, supposed to have been buried at
Alexandria.  (Pilgrimage, i. 16.)

[FN#139]   According to Moslem law, laid down by Mohammed on a
delicate occasion and evidently for a purpose, four credible
witnesses are required to prove fornication, adultery, sodomy and
so forth; and they must swear that actually saw rem in re, the
"Kohl-needle in the Kohl-etui," as the Arabs have it.  This
practically prevents conviction and the sabre cuts the Gordian
knot.

[FN#140]   Who, in such case, would represent our equerry.

[FN#141]   The Badawi not only always tells the truth, a perfect
contrast with the townsfolk; he is blunt in speech addressing his
Sultan "O Sa'id!" and he has a hard rough humour which we may
fairly describe as "wut."  When you chaff him look out for falls.

[FN#142]   The answer is as old as the hills, teste the tale of
what happened when Amasis (who on horseback) raised his leg,
"broke wind and bad the messenger carry it back to Apries." 
Herod. Ii. 162.  But for the full significance of the Badawi's
most insulting reply see the Tale of Abu Hasan in Night ccccxi.

[FN#143]   Arab.  "Ya saki" al-Dakan" meaning long bearded
(foolish) as well as frosty bearded.

[FN#144]   P. N. of the tribe, often mentioned in The Nights.

[FN#145]   Adnan, which whom Arab genealogy begins, is generally
supposed to be the eighth (Al-Tabari says the fortieth)
descendant from Ishmael and nine generations are placed between
him and Fahr (Fihr) Kuraysh.  The Prophet cut all disputes short
by saying, "Beyond Adnan none save Allah wotteth and the
genealogists lie."  (Pilgrimage ii. 344)  M.C. de Perceval dates
Adnan about B.C. 130.

[FN#146]   Koran xxxiii., 38.

[FN#147]   Arab.  "Arab al-Araba," as before noticed (vol. i. 12)
the pure and genuine blood as opposed to the "Musta'aribah," the
"Muta'arribah," the "Mosarabians" and other Araboids; the first
springing from Khatan (Yaktan?) and the others from Adnan. And
note that "Arabi" = a man of pure Arab race, either of the Desert
or of the city,  while A'arabi applies only to the Desert man,
the Badawi.

[FN#148]   Koran xxxviii. 2, speaking of the Unbelievers (i.e.
non-Moslems) who are full of pride and contention.

[FN#149]   One of the Ashab, or Companions of the Apostle, that
is them who knew him personally.  (Pilgrimage ii. 80, etc.)  The
Ashab al-Suffah (Companions of the bench or sofa) were certain
houseless Believers lodged by the Prophet. (Pilgrimage ii. 143).

[FN#150]   Hence Omar is entitled "Al-Adil = the Just."  Readers
will remember that by Moslem law and usage murder and homicide
are offences to be punished by the family, not by society or its
delegates.  This system reappears in civilisation under the
denomination of "Lynch Law," a process infinitely distasteful to
lawyers (whom it abolishes) and most valuable when administered
with due discretion.

[FN#151]   Lane translates (ii. 592) "from a desire of seeing the
face of God;" but the general belief of Al-Islam is that the
essence of Allah's corporeal form is different from man's.  The
orthodox expect to "see their Lord on Doom-day as they see the
full moon" (a tradition).  But the Mu'atazilites deny with the
existence of matter the corporiety of Alah and hold that he will
be seen only with the spiritual eyes, i.e. of reason.

[FN#152]  See Gesta Romanorum, Tale cviii., "of Constancy in
adhering to Promises," founded on Damon and Pythias or, perhaps,
upon the Arabic.

[FN#153]   Arab.  "Al-Ahram," a word of unknown provenance.  It
has been suggested that the singular form (Haram), preceded by
the Coptic article "pi" (= the) suggested to the Greeks
"Pyramis."  But this word is still sub judice and every
Egyptologist seems to propose his own derivation. Brugsch (Egypt
i. 72) makes it Greek, the Egyptian being "Abumir," while "pir-
am-us" = the edge of the pyramid, the corners running from base
to apex.  The Egyptologist proves also what the Ancients either
ignored or forgot to mention, that each pyramid had its own name.

[FN#154]   Arab.  "Ahkam," in this matter supporting the
"Pyramidologists."

[FN#155]   All imaginative.

[FN#156]   It has always been my opinion founded upon
considerations too long to detail, that the larger Pyramids
contain many unopened chambers.  Dr. Grant Bey of Cairo proposed
boring through the blocks as Artesian wells are driven.  I cannot
divine why Lane (ii, 592) chose to omit this tale, which is
founded on historic facts and interests us by suggesting a
comparison between Mediaeval Moslem superstitions and those of
our xixth Century, which to our descendants will appear as wild,
if not as picturesque, as those of The Nights.  The "inspired
British inch" and the building by Melchisedek (the Shaykh of some
petty Syrian village) will compare not unaptly with the enchanted
swords, flexible glass and guardian spirits.  But the
Pyramidennarren is a race which will not speedily die out: it is
based on Nature, the Pyramids themselves.

[FN#157]   Arab.  "Rizm"; hence, through the Italian Risma our
ream (= 20 quires of paper, etc.), which our dictionaries derive
from        (!).  See "frail" in Night dcccxxxviii.

[FN#158]   Arab.  "Tarikah" = the path trodden by ascetics and
mystics in order to attain true knowledge (Ma'rifat in Pers.
Danish).  These are extensive subjects: for the present I must
refer readers to the Dabistan, iii. 35 and iii. 29, 36-7.

[FN#159]   Alluding to the Fishar or "Squeeze of the tomb."  This
is the Jewish Hibbut hakkeber which all must endure, save those
who lived in the Holy Land or died on the Sabbath-eve (Friday
night).  Then comes the questioning by the Angels Munkar and
Nakir (vulgarly called Nakir and Nakir) for which see Lane (M.E.
chapt. xviii.).  In Egypt a "Mulakkin" (intelligencer) is hired
to prompt and instruct the dead.  Moslems are beginning to
question these facts of their faith: a Persian acquaintance of
mine filled his dead father's mouth with flour and finding it in
loco on opening the grave, publicly derided the belief.  But the
Mullahs had him on the hip, after the fashion of reverends,
declaring that the answers were made through the whole body, not
only by the mouth.  At last the Voltairean had to quit Shiraz.

[FN#160]   Arab. "Wali" = a saint, Santon (Ital. Form) also a
slave.  See in Richardson (Dissert. iii.), an illustration of the
difference between Wali and Wali as exemplified by the Caliph al-
Kadir and Mahmud of Ghazni.

[FN#161]   Arab.  "Tin" = the tenacious clay puddled with chaff
which serves as mortar for walls built of Adobe or sun dried
brick.  I made a mistake in my Pilgrimage (i.10) translating Ras
al-Tin the old Pharos of Alexandria, by "Headland of Figs."  It
is Headland of Clay, so called from the argile there found and
which supported an old pottery.

[FN#162]   The danik (Pers. Dang) is the sixth of a dirham.  Mr.
S. L. Poole (The Acad. April 26, '79) prefers his uncle's
translation "a sixth" (what of?) to Mr. Payne's "farthing."  The
latter at any rate is intelligible.
 
[FN#163]   The devotee was "Saim al-dahr" i.e. he never ate nor
drank from daylight to dark throughout the year.

[FN#164]   The ablution of a common man differs from that of an
educated Moslem as much as the eating of a clown and a gentleman. 
Moreover there are important technical differences between the
Wuzu of the Sunni and the Shi'ah.

[FN#165]   i.e., by honouring his father.

[FN#166]   This young saint was as selfish and unnatural a sinner
as Saint Alexius of the Gesta Romanorum (Tale xv.), to whom my
friend, the late Thomas Wright, administered just and due
punishment.

[FN#167]   The verses are affecting enough, though by no means
high poetry.

[FN#168]   The good young man cut his father for two reasons:
secular power (an abomination to good Moslems) and defective
title to the Caliphate.  The latter is a trouble to Turkey in the
present day and with time will prove worse.

[FN#169]   Umm Amri (written Amru and pronounced Amr') a
matronymic, "mother of Amru."  This story and its terminal verse
is a regular Joe Miller.

[FN#170]   Abuse and derision of schoolmaster are staple subjects
in the East as in the West, (Quem Dii oderunt paedagogum
fecerunt).  Anglo-Indians will remember:

     "Miyan-ji ti-ti!
     Bachche-ki gand men anguli ki thi!"
     ("Schoolmaster hum!
     Who fumbled and fingered the little boy's bum?")

[FN#171]   Arab.  "Mujawirin" = the lower servants, sweepers,
etc.  See Pilgrimage ii. 161, where it is also applied to certain
"settlers" at Al-Medinah.  Burckhardt (No. 480) notices another
meaning "foreigners who attend mosque-lectures" and quotes the
saying, "A. pilgrimaged:" quoth B. "yes! and for his villanies
resideth (Mujawir) at Meccah."

[FN#172]   The custom (growing obsolete in Egypt) is preserved in
Afghanistan where the learned wear turbans equal to the canoe-
hats of the Spanish cardinals.

[FN#173]   Arab.  "Makmarah," a metal cover for the usual brasier
or pan of charcoal which acts as a fire-place.  Lane (ii. 600)
does not translate the word and seems to think it means a belt or
girdle, thus blunting the point of the dominie's excuse.

[FN#174]   This story, a very old Joe Miller, was told to Lane as
something new and he introduced it into his Modern Egyptians, end
of chapt. ii.

[FN#175]   This tale is a mere abbreviation of "The King and his
Wazir's Wife," in the Book of Sindibad or the Malice of Women,
Night dcxxviii., {which see for annotations}.

[FN#176]   The older "Roe" which may be written "Rukh" or
"Rukhkh." Colonel Yule, the
learned translator of Marco Polo, has shown that "Roc's" feathers
were not uncommon
curiosities in mediaeval ages; and holds that they were mostly
fronds of the palm Raphia
vinifera, which has the largest leaf in the vegetable kingdom and
which the Moslems of
Zanzibar call "Satan's date-tree." I need hardly quote "Frate
Cipolla and the Angel Gabriel's Feather." (Decameron vi. 10.)

[FN#177]   The tale is told in a bald, disjointed style and will
be repeated in Sindbad the Seaman where I shall again notice the
"Roc." See Night dxxxvii., etc.

[FN#178]   Hirah in Mesopotamia was a Christian city and
principality subject to the Persian Monarchs; and a rival to the
Roman kingdom of Ghassan. It has a long history, for which see
D'Herbelot.

[FN#179]   A pre-Islamite poet.

[FN#180]   Arab. "Bika'a," alluding to the pilgrimages made to
monasteries and here equivalent to, "Address ye to the road,"
etc.

[FN#181]   Whose by name was Abu Ali, a poet under the Abbasides
(eighth and ninth centuries).

[FN#182]  A well-known quarter of Baghdad, often mentioned in The
Nights.

[FN#183]  Another well-known poet of the time.

[FN#184]   Arab. "Sardab": noticed before.

[FN#185]  A gigantic idol in the Ka'abah, destroyed by Mohammed:
it gave name to a tribe.

[FN#186]  Arab. "Ya Kawwad:" hence the Port. and Span.
Alcoviteiro.

[FN#187]  Arab "Tufayli," a term before noticed; the class was as
well-known in Baghdad and Cairo as in ancient Rome.

[FN#188]  Arab. "Jauzar"=a bubalus (Antilope defessa), also
called "Aye" from the large black eyes. This bovine antelope is
again termed Bakar al-Wahsh (wild cattle) or "Bos Sylvestris"
(incerti generic, Forsk.). But Janzar also signifies hart, so I
render it by "Ariel" (the well-known antelope).

[FN#189]  Arab. "Taraib" plur. of taribah. The allusion is to the
heart, and "the little him's a her."

[FN#190]  A well-known poet of the ninth century (A.D.).

[FN#191]  These easy deaths for love are a lieu common: See
sundry of them in the Decameron (iv. 7, etc.); and, in the
Heptameron (Nouv. Ixx.), the widow who lay down and died of love
and sorrow that her passion had become known. For the fainting of
lovers see Nouvelle xix.

[FN#192]  This is a favourite Badawi dish, but too expensive
unless some accident happen to the animal. Old camel is much like
bull-beef, but the young meat is excellent, although not relished
by Europeans because, like strange fish, it has no recognised
flavour. I have noticed it in my "First Footsteps" (p. 68, etc.).
There is an old idea in Europe that the maniacal vengeance of the
Arab is increased by eating this flesh, the beast is certainly
vindictive enough; but a furious and frantic vengefulness
characterises the North American Indian who never saw a camel.
Mercy and pardon belong to the elect, not to the miserables who
make up " humanity."

[FN#193]   i.e. of the Province Hazramaut, the Biblical
Hazarmaveth (Gen. x. 26). The people are the Swill of Arabia and
noted for thrift and hard bargains; hence the saying, If you meet
a serpent and a Hazrami, slay the Hazrami.  To prove how
ubiquitous they are it is related that a man, flying from their
society, reached the uttermost parts of China where he thought
himself safe.  But, as he was about to pass the night in some
ruin, he heard a voice bard by him exclaim, "O Imad al-Din!" 
(the name of the patron-saint of Hazramaut).  Thereupon he arose
and fled and he is, they say, flying still.

[FN#194]   Arab. "Fal" alluding to the Sortes Coranicae and other
silly practices known to the English servant-girs when curious
about her future and her futur.

[FN#195]   i.e., in Arab-land (where they eat dates) and Ajam, or
lands non-Arab (where bread is the staff of life); that is, all
the world over.

[FN#196]   This story is curious and ethnologically valuable. The
Badawi who eructates as a civility, has a mortal hatred to a
crepitus ventris; and were a by-stander to laugh at its
accidental occurrence, he would at once be cut down as a
"pundonor." The same is the custom amongst the Highlanders of
Afghanistan, and its artificial nature suggests direct
derivation, for the two regions are separated by a host of
tribes, Persians and Baloch, Sindis and Panjabis who utterly
ignore the point of honour and behave like Europeans. The raids
of the pre-Islamitic Arabs over the lands lying to the north-east
of them are almost forgotten; still there are traces, and this
may be one of them.

[FN#197]   Arab. "Al-'Ar." The Badawi saying is "Al-nar wa la l-
'ar" (Hell-)fire, but not shame. The sentiment is noble.  Hasan
the Prophet's grandson, a poor creature demoralised by over-
marrying, chose the converse, "Shame is better than Hell-fire." 
An old Arabic poem has,

     "The Fire and not shame be the Lord of thee
      And e'en to The Fire from shame go flee."

Al-Hariri (Ass. of the Badawin) also has,

     "For rather would I die my death than shame,--
      On bier be borne than bear a caitiff's name."

[FN#198] A grammarian and rhetorician of ninth century.

[FN#199]  Once existing in Syrian Hamah (the Biblical Hamath);
and so called because here died the Emperor Heraclius called by
the Arabs "Hirakl."

[FN#200]  Till lately it was the custom to confine madmen in
Syrian monasteries, hoping a cure from the patron Saint, and a
terrible time they had of it. Every guide book relates the
healing process as formerly pursued at the Maronite Convent
Koshaya not far from Bayrut. The idiot or maniac was thrust
headlong by the monks into a dismal cavern with a heavy chain
round his neck, and was tied up within a span of the wall to
await the arrival of Saint Anthony who especially affects this
holy place. In very few weeks the patient was effectually cured
or killed by cold, solitude and starvation.

[FN#201]  The Moslem Eve, much nearer the Hebrew "Hawah" = the
"manifester," because (Gen. iii. 20) she was (to be) the mother
of all that live ("Kull hayy").

[FN#202]  The mad lover says "they" for "she," which would be too
familiar in speaking to strangers.

[FN#203]  i.e. falsely to report the death.

[FN#204]  A famous grammarian, etc., of the tenth century.

[FN#205]  The classical Amorium in Phrygia now Anatolia: Anbar is
a town (before mentioned) on the Euphrates; by the rules of
Arabic grammar the word is pronounced (though never written)
Ambar.

[FN#206]  "Art thou not the slave of the Messiah, the Rahib
(monk)?" "No! I am the slave of Allah, the Raghib (desirous of
mercy from the Almighty). " A fair specimen of the Saj'a or
rhymed prose. Abdallah (properly "Abdu'llah:") is a kind of
neutral name, neither Jewish, Moslem nor Christian; hence I
adopted it, (Pilgrimage i. 20.)

[FN#207]  Arab. "Hanut," prop. a tavern where liquors are sold, a
term applied contemptuously to shops, inns, etc., kept by
Christians.

[FN#208]  Arab. "Shirk" = syntheism of the "Mushrik" (one who
makes other gods partners with God), a word pronounced "Mushrit"
by the Wahhabis and the Badawin.

[FN#209]  Koran vii. 195. The passage declaims against the idols
of the Arabs, sun, moon. stars, etc.

[FN#210]  This minor miracle is commonly reported, and is not, I
believe, unknown to modern "Spiritualism." The dead Wali or
Waliyah (Saintess) often impels the bier-bearers to the spot
where he would be buried: hence in Cairo the tombs scattered
about the city. Lane notices it, Mod. E. chaps. xxviii.

[FN#211]  Koran x. 36, speaking of being turned aside from the
true worship.

[FN#212]  One of the Wazirs of al-Maamun, Kurrat al-Ayn =
"coolness (i.e. delight) of the eyes" Ali bin Hisham surnamed
Abu'l-Hasan, was prefect of Baghdad under the same reign.

[FN#213]  The Mac. Edit. (ii. 448) reads for Kawaid (plur. of
Kaid = Governors, Span. Alcayde) "Fawaid": hence Lane (ii. 606)
translates " try thy heart."

 [FN#214]  The mats of Sind were famous even in my day, but under
English rule native industries are killed out by Manchester and
Birmingham.

[FN#215]  Sajah was the name of a famous female impostor, a
contemporary of "Musaylimah the Liar."

[FN#216]  A poet of Mohammed's day.

[FN#217]  A singer and composer of the first century (A. H.).

[FN#218]  Arab = a roe, a doe; also the Yoni (of women, mares and
bitches). It is the Heb. Tabitha and the Greek Dorcas.

[FN#219]  Within the Hudud al-Harem (bounds of the Holy Places),
at Al-Medinah as well as Meccah, all "Muharramat" (forbidden
sins) are doubly unlawful, such as drinking spirits, immoral
life, etc. The Imam Malik forbids slaying animals without,
however, specifying any penalty. The felling of trees is a
disputed point; and no man can be put to death except invaders,
infidels and desecraters. (Pilgrimage ii. 167.)

[FN#220]  A poet of the first century (A.H.).

[FN#221]  In Arab. =a fawn beginning to walk, also the 28th lunar
mansion or station, usually known as Batn al-Hut or Whale's
belly. These mansions or houses, the constellations through which
the moon passes in her course along her orbit, are much used in
Moslem astrology and meteorology.

[FN#222]  Arab. Kalla-ma = it is seldom (rare) that etc. used in
books.

[FN#223]  Dishonoured by his love being made public. So Hafiz,
Petrarch and Camoens.

[FN#224]  Sixth Abbaside, A.D. 809-813.

[FN#225]  Ala'llah, tenth Abbaside, A. H. 232-47 (847-61),
grandson of Al-Rashid who succeeded Al-Wasik. He was a fanatic
Sunni, much opposed to the Shi'ahs and he ordered the Christians
to wear round their necks the Ghull (collar of wood, iron, or
leather), to dress in yellow head-gear and girdles, use wooden
stirrups and place figures of devils in front of their
dwelling-houses. He also gave distinct dresses to their women and
slaves. The Ghull, or collar, was also used for a punishment and
vermin gathered under it when riveted round the neck: hence
Golius calls it "pediculosum columbar."

[FN#226]  Wazir of the above. killed by al-Muntasir Billah A. H.
247 (= 861).

[FN#227]  Easterns during purgation are most careful and deride
the want of precaution in Europeans. They do not leave the house
till all is passed off, and avoid baths, wine and women which
they afterwards resume with double zest. Here "breaking the seal"
is taking the girl's maidenhead.

[FN#228]  Johannes, a Greek favoured by Al-Mutawakkil and other
Abbaside Caliphs. 

[FN#229]  Lady of Shaykhs, elders in the faith and men of
learning

[FN#230]  = A.D. 1166.

[FN#231]  Koran iv. 38. I have before noted what the advantages
are.

[FN#232]  Koran ii. 282, "of those whom ye shall choose for
witnesses."

[FN#233]  Koran iv. 175, "Whereas if there be two sisters, they
inherit only two-thirds between them."

[FN#234]  The secondary meaning is "Fa'il" = the active sodomite
and "Mafa'ul" = the passive, a catamite: the former is not an
insulting word, the latter is a most injurious expression.
"Novimus et qui te!"

[FN#235]  It is an unpleasant fact that almost all the poetry of
Hafiz is addressed to youths, as we see by the occasional
introduction of Arabic (e.g., Afaka'llah). Persian has no genders
properly so called, hence the effect is less striking. Sa'di, the
"Persian Moralist" begins one of the tales, "A certain learned
man fell in love with a beautiful son of a blacksmith," which
Gladwin, translating for the general, necessarily changed to
"daughter."

[FN#236]  The famous author of the Anthology called Al-Hamasah.

[FN#237]  i.e., teeth under the young mustachio.

[FN#238]  The "Silk man" and the celebrated author of the
Makamat, assemblies or seances translated (or attempted) into all
the languages of Europe. We have two in English, the first by
Theodore Preston, M.A. (London, Madden, 1850); but it contains
only twenty of the fifty pieces. The second by the late Mr.
Chenery (before alluded to) ends with the twenty-sixth assembly:
one volume in fact, the other never having been finished. English
readers, therefore, are driven to the grand edition of the
Makamat in folio by Baron Silvestre de Sacy.

[FN#239]  The sword of the eye has a Hamail (baldrick worn over
right shoulder, Pilgrimage i. 352) to support the "Ghimd" (vulg.
Ghamad) or scabbard (of wood or leather): and this baldrick is
the young whisker.

[FN#240]  The conceit of "Sulafat" (ptisane, grape juice allowed
to drain on the slabs) and "Sawalif" (tresses, locks) has been
explained. The newest wine is the most inebriating, a fact not
much known in England, but familiar to the drinker of "Vino
novo."

[FN#241]  Koran xii. 51, this said by the nobleman's (Potiphar's)
wife who adds, "I selected him to lie with me; and he (Joseph) is
one of those who speak truth."

[FN#242]  Here we have a specimen of the strained Saj'a or
balanced prose: slave-girls (jawari) are massed with flowing
tears (dam'u jari) on account of the Kafiyah or rhyme.

[FN#243]  The detected sodomite is punished with death according
to Moslem law, but again comes the difficulty of proof. At Shiraz
I have heard of a pious Moslem publicly executing his son.

[FN#244]  Koran xxvi. 165 et seq. The Lord speaks to the "people
of Lot" (Sodomites). Mr. Payne renders "Min al-alamima," "from
the four corners of the world."

[FN#245]  Meaning before and behind, a Moslemah "Bet Balmanno."

[FN#246]  Arab. " Luti," (plur. Lawati), much used in Persian as
a buffoon, a debauchee, a rascal. The orig. sig. is "One of (the
people of) Lot." The old English was Ingle or Yngle (a bardachio,
a catamite, a boy kept for sodomy), which Minsheu says is, "Vox
hispanica et significat Latine Inguen" (the groin). Our vulgar
modern word like the Italian bugiardo is pop. derived from Fr.
Bougre, alias Bulgarus, a Bulgarian, a heretic: hence Boulgrin
(Rabelais i. chaps. ii.) is popularly applied to the Albigeois
(Albigenses, whose persecution began shortly after A.D. 1200) and
the Lutherans. I cannot but think that "bougre" took its especial
modern signification after the French became acquainted with the
Brazil, where the Huguenots (in A.D. 1555) were founding a
Nouvelle France, alias Equinoctiale, alias Antarctique, and
whence the savages were carried as curiosities to Paris. Their
generic name was "Bugre" (properly a tribe in Southern Brazil,
but applied to all the redskins) and they were all born
Sodomites. More of this in the terminal Essay.

[FN#247]  His paper is the whiteness of his skin. I have quoted
the Persian saying of a young beard: "his cheeks don mourning for
his beauty's death."

[FN#248]  Arab. "Khabal," lit. the pus which flows from the
bodies of the damned.

[FN#249]  Most characteristic of Egypt is all this scene. Her
reverence, it is true, sits behind a curtain; but her virtue uses
language which would shame the lowest European prostitute; and
which is filthy almost as Dean Swift's.

[FN#250]  Arab. "Niyat:" the Moslem's idea of intentions quite
runs with the Christian's. There must be a "Niyat" or purpose of
prayer or the devotion is valueless. Lane tells a pleasant tale
of a thief in the Mosque, saying "I purpose (before Prayer) to
carry off this nice pair of new shoes!" 

[FN#251]  Arab. "Ya 'l-Ajuz" (in Cairo "Agooz" pronounced "Ago-o-
oz"): the address is now insulting and would elicit "The old
woman in thine eye" (with fingers extended). In Egypt the polite
address is "O lady (Sitt), O pilgrimess, O bride, and O daughter"
(although she be the wrong side of fifty). In Arabia you may say
"O woman (Imraah)" but in Egypt the reply would be "The woman
shall see Allah cut out thy heart!" So in Southern Italy you
address "bella fe" (fair one) and cause a quarrel by
"vecchiarella."

[FN#252] Governor of Egypt, Khorasan, etc. under Al-Maamun.

[FN#253] i.e., a companion, a solacer: it is also a man's name
(vol. i. xxiv.).

[FN#254] At Baghdad; evidently written by a Baghdad or Mosul man.

[FN#255] A blind traditionist of Bassorah (ninth century).

[FN#256] Arab. "Zaghab"=the chick's down; the warts on the
cucumber which sometimes develop into projections.

[FN#257] The Persian saying is, A kiss without moustachio is
bread without salt.

[FN#258] "And We will prove you with evil, and with good, for a
trial of you; and unto Us shall ye return." (Koran xxi. 36.) The
saying is always in the Moslem's mouth.

[FN#259] Arab. "Sunnat," lit.=a law, especially applied to the
habit and practice of the Apostle in religious and semi-religious
matters, completing the "Hadis," or his spoken words. Anything
unknown is entitled "Bida'ah"=innovation. Hence the strict Moslem
is a model Conservative whose exemplar of life dates from the
seventh century. This fact may be casuistically explained away;
but is not less an obstacle to all progress and it will be one of
the principal dangers threatening Al-Islam. Only fair to say that
an "innovation" introduced by a perfect follower of the Prophet
is held equal theoretically to a Sunnat; but vulgarly it is said,
"The rabble will not take gold which is not coined."

[FN#260] Arab. "Arsh"=the ninth Heaven, the Throne of the Deity,
above the Seven Heavens of the planets and the Primum Mobile
which, in the Ptolemaic system, sets them all in motion.

[FN#261] This description of a good Moslem's death is at once
concise, pathetic and picturesque.

[FN#262] This is the first mention of coffee; apparently
introduced by the scribe: the word rendered "coffee-makers" is
"Kahwajiyah"; an Arab. plur. of a Turkish termination (-ji) to an
Arab. word "Kahwah" (before noticed).

[FN#263] Picnics are still made to Rauzah (Rodah) island: I have
enjoyed many a one, but the ground is all private property.

[FN#264] Arab. "Hosh," plur. Hishan, the low courts surrounded by
mean lodgings which in "native" Cairo still contrast so strongly
with the "gingerbread" of the new buildings.

[FN#265] This is the Moslem equivalent of "thank you." He looks
upon the donor as the channel through which Allah sends him what
he wants and prays for more to come. Thus "May your shadow never
be less" means, May you increase in prosperity so that I may gain
thereby! And if a beggar is disposed to be insolent (a very
common case), he will tell you his mind pretty freely on the
subject, and make it evident to you that all you have is also his
and that La propriete (when not shared) est le vol.

[FN#266] I have noticed in my Pilgrimage (i. 51-53) the kindly
care with which the stranger is treated by Moslems, a marvellous
contrast to the ways of "civilization."

[FN#267] Arab. "Dimyat," vulg. pronounced "Dumiyat."

[FN#268] Where the door-keepers sit and receive their friends.

[FN#269] This is a traveller's 'Kit' in the East.

[FN#270] Arab. "Takht-rawan," from Persian meaning "moveable
throne."

[FN#271] The use of the expression proved the speaker to be a
Moslem Jinni.

[FN#272] The "haunted" house proper, known to the vulgar and to
spiritualists becomes, I have said, amongst Moslems a place
tenanted by Jinns.

[FN#273] Needless to say there never was a Sultan or a King of
Baghdad nor a Duke of Athens. This story would seem not to have
been written by the author of "the Emir bin Tahir," etc. Night
ccccxxiv.

[FN#274] Plur. of Alim=one learned in the law, a D.D. Mohammed
did his best to abolish the priest and his craft by making each
Moslem paterfamilias a pontifex in his own household and he
severely condemned monkery and celibacy. But human nature was too
much for him: even before his death ascetic associations began to
crop up. Presently the Olema in Al-Islam formed themselves into a
kind of clergy; with the single but highly important difference
that they must (or ought to) live by some honest secular calling
and not by the "cure of souls"; hence Mahomet IV. of Turkey was
solemnly deposed. So far and no farther Mohammed was successful
and his success has secured for him the lively and lasting hatred
of the ecclesiastical caste which he so honestly and wisely
attempted to abate. Even to the present day missionaries have a
good word for the Guebre and the Buddhist, the Brahmanist and the
Confucian, but none for the Moslem: Dr. Livingstone, for one
instance of many, evidently preferred the Fetichist, whom he
could convert, to the Unitarian Faithful whom he could not.

[FN#275] i.e. they recited seven times (an unusual number), for
greater solemnity, the opening Chapter of the Koran which does
general duty on such occasions as making covenants and swearing
fealty. This proclaiming a King by acclamation suggests the
origin of the old and venerable Portuguese institution.

[FN#276] By affixing his own seal and that of the King. This in
later times was supplanted by the "Tughra," the imperial cypher
or counter-mark (much like a writing master's flourish), with
which Europe has now been made familiar through the agency of
Turkish tobacco.

[FN#277] Arab. "Wird"=the twenty-five last chapters of the Koran
which are repeated, one or more at a time, after the end of the
"Farz," or obligatory prayers and ad libitum with the Sunnat or
customary, and the Nafilah or supererogatory.

[FN#278] The sensible creed of Al-Islam freely allows
anthropophagy when it saves life; a contrast to the
sentimentalism of the West which brings a "charge of cannibalism"
against unfortunate expeditionists. I particularly allude to the
scandalous pulings of the English Press over the gallant and
unfortunate Greely voyage. (The Academy, Sept. 25, 1884.)

[FN#279] The story is mere AEsopic: the "Two dogs" contains it
all. One of Mohammed's sensible sayings is recorded and deserves
repetition:--"Empire endureth with infidelity (idolatry, etc.),
but not with tyranny."

[FN#280] This couplet occurs in Night xxi. (vol. i. 207); so I
give Torrens (p.207) by way of variety.

[FN#281] Lane (ii. 636) omits this tale, "as it would not only
require a volume of commentary but be extremely tiresome to most
readers." Quite true; but it is valuable to Oriental Students who
are beginning their studies, as an excellent compendium of
doctrine and practice according to the Shafi'i School.

[FN#282] Pronounced Aboo 'l-Husn = Father of Beauty, a fancy
name.

[FN#283] As in most hot climates so in Egypt the dead are buried
at once despite the risk of vivisepulture. This seems an instinct
with the Semitic (Arabian) race teste Abraham, as with the Gypsy.
Hence the Moslems have invoked religious aid. The Mishkat
al-Masabih (i. 387) makes Mohammed say, "When any one of you
dieth you may not keep him in the house but bear him quickly to
his grave"; and again, "Be quick in raising up the bier: for if
the dead have been a good man, it is good to bear him gravewards
without delay; and if bad, it is frowardness ye put from your
necks."

[FN#284] This biting of the hand in Al-Hariri expresses
bitterness of repentance and he uses more than once the Koranic
phrase (chapter vii., 148) "Sukita fi aydihim," lit. where it
(the biting) was fallen upon their hands; i.e. when it repented
them; "sukita" being here not a passive verb as it appears, but
an impersonal form uncommon in Arabic. The action is instinctive,
a survival of the days when man was a snarling and snapping
animal (physically) armed only with claws and teeth.

[FN#285] Arab. "'Alam," applied to many things, an "old man" of
stones (Kakur), a signpost with a rag on the top, etc.

[FN#286] The moon of Ramazan was noticed in Night ix. That of
Sha'aban (eighth month) begins the fighting month after the
conclusion of the Treuga Dei in Rajab. See Night ccclxxviii.

[FN#287] These lines have occurred in Night cccxix. I give Mr.
Payne's version for variety.

[FN#288] i.e. in her prime, at fourteen to fifteen.

[FN#289] i.e. pale and yellow.

[FN#290] The word means the wood; but it alludes to a preparation
made by levigating it on a stone called in India "Sandlasa." The
gruel-like stuff is applied with the right hand to the right side
of the neck, drawing the open fingers from behind forwards so as
to leave four distinct streaks, then down to the left side, and
so on to the other parts of the body.

[FN#291] Arab. "Haykal" which included the Porch, the Holy and
the Holy of Holies. The word is used as      in a wider sense by
Josephus A. J. v. v. 3. In Moslem writings it is applied to a
Christian Church generally, on account of its images.

[FN#292] These lines having occurred before, I here quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#293] Arab writers often mention the smile of beauty, but
rarely, after European fashion, the laugh, which they look upon
as undignified. A Moslem will say "Don't guffaw (Kahkahah) in
that way; leave giggling and grinning to monkeys and Christians."
The Spaniards, a grave people, remark that Christ never laughed.
I would draw the reader's attention to a theory of mine that the
open-hearted laugh has the sound of the vowels a and o; while e,
i, and u belong to what may be roughly classed as the rogue
order.

[FN#294] i.e. gaining the love of another, love.

[FN#295] i.e. the abrogated passages and those by which they are
abrogated. This division is necessary for "inspired volumes,"
which always abound in contradictions. But the charge of
"opportunism" brought against the Koran is truly absurd; as if
"revelation" could possibly be aught save opportune.

[FN#296] Koran iv. 160, the chapter "Women."

[FN#297] She unveiled, being a slave-girl and for sale. If a free
woman show her face to a Moslem, he breaks out into violent
abuse, because the act is intended to let him know that he is
looked upon as a small boy or an eunuch or a Chriastian--in fact
not a man.

[FN#298] Ilah=Heb. El, a most difficult root, meaning strength,
interposition, God (Numen) "the" (article) "don't" (do not), etc.
etc.

[FN#299] As far as I know Christians are the only worshippers who
kneel as if their lower legs were cut off and who "join hands"
like the captive offering his wrists to be bound (dare manus).
The posture, however, is not so ignoble as that of the Moslem
"Sijdah" (prostration) which made certain North African tribes
reject Al-Islam saying, "These men show their hind parts to
heaven."

[FN#300] i.e. saying "I intend (purpose) to pray (for instance)
the two-bow prayer (ruka'tayn) of the day-break," etc.

[FN#301] So called because it prohibits speaking with others till
the prayer is ended.

[FN#302] Lit. "any thing opposite;" here used for the Ka'abah
towards which men turn in prayer; as Guebres face the sun or fire
and idolators their images. "Al-Kiblatayn" (= the two Kiblahs)
means Meccah and Jerusalem, which was faced by Moslems as well as
Jews and Christians till Mohammed changed the direction. For the
occasion of the change see my Pilgrimage, ii. 320.

[FN#303] Which includes Tayammum or washing with sand. This is a
very cleanly practice in a hot, dry land and was adopted long
before Mohammed. Cedrenus tells of baptism with sand being
administered to a dying traveller in the African desert.

[FN#304] The Koranic order for Wuzu is concise and as usual
obscure, giving rise to a host of disputes and casuistical
questions. Its text runs (chapt. v.), "O true believers, when you
prepare to pray, wash (Ghusl) your faces, and your hands unto the
elbows; and rub (Mas-h) your hands and your feet unto the ankles;
and if ye be unclean by having lain with a woman, wash (Ghusl)
yourselves all over." The purifications and ceremonious ablutions
of the Jews originated this command; and the early Christians did
very unwisely in not making the bath obligatory. St. Paul (Heb.
xi. 22) says, "Let us draw near with a true heart...having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and our bodies washed
with clean (or pure) water." But this did not suffice. Hence the
Eastern Christian, in hot climates where cleanliness should rank
before godliness, is distinguished by his dirt which as a holy or
reverend man he makes still dirtier, and he offers an ugly
comparison with the Moslem and especially the Hindu. The neglect
of commands to wash and prohibitions to drink strong waters are
the two grand physical objections of the Christian code of
morality.

[FN#305] Arab. "Istinshak"=snuffing up water from the palm of the
right hand so as to clean thoroughly the nostrils. This
"function" is unreasonably neglected in Europe, to the detriment
of the mucous membrane and the olfactory nerves.

[FN#306] So as to wash between them. The thick beard is combed
out with the fingers.

[FN#307] Poor human nature! How sad to compare ita pretensions
with its actualities.

[FN#308] Complete ablution is rendered necessary chiefly by the
emission of semen either in copulation or in nocturnal pollution.
The water must be pure and not less than a certain quantity, and
it must touch every part of the skin beginning with the right
half of the person and ending with the left. Hence a plunge-bath
is generally preferred.

[FN#309] Arab. "Ta'mim," lit. crowning with turband, or tiara,
here=covering, i.e. wetting.

[FN#310] This practice (saying "I purpose to defer the washing of
the feet," etc.) is now somewhat obsolete.

[FN#311] Arabs have a prejudice against the hydropathic treatment
of wounds, holding that water poisons them: and, as the native
produce usually contains salt, soda and magnesia, they are
justified by many cases. I once tried water-bandages in Arabia
and failed dismally.

[FN#312] The sick man says his prayers lying in bed, etc., and as
he best can.

[FN#313] i.e. saying, "And peace be on us and on the worshippers
of Allah which be pious."

[FN#314] i.e. saying, " I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the
Stoned."

[FN#315] Certain parts should be recited aloud (jahr) and others
sotto voce (with mussitation=Khafi). No mistake must be made in
this matter where a Moslem cannot err.

[FN#316] Hence an interest of two-and-a-half percent is not held
to be "Riba" or unlawful gain of money by money, usury.

[FN#317] The meal must be finished before the faster can plainly
distinguish the white thread from the black thread (Koran ii.
183); some understand this literally, others apply it to the dark
and silvery streak of zodiacal light which appears over the
Eastern horizon an hour or so before sunrise. The fast then
begins and ends with the disappearance of the sun. I have noticed
its pains and penalties in my Pilgrimage, i. 110, etc.

[FN#318] For the "Azan" or call to prayer see Lane, M. E., chapt.
xviii. The chant, however, differs in every country, and a
practical ear will know the land by its call.

[FN#319] Arab. "Hadis" or saying of the Apostle.

[FN#320] "Al-I'itikaf" resembles the Christian "retreat;" but the
worshipper generally retires to a mosque, especially in Meccah.
The Apostle practised it on Jabal Hira and other places.

[FN#321] The word is the Heb. "Hagg" whose primary meaning is
circularity of form or movement. Hence it applied to religious
festivals in which 