s the
croton-nut of the Gold Coast.

[FN#24]  The Bresl. Edit. iii. 354 sends him to the "land of Sín"
(China).

[FN#25]  Arab. "Yá Kisrawi!"=O subject of the Kisrá or Chosroë;
the latter explained in vol.i.,75.[Volume 1, Footnote # 128] 
"Fars" is the origin of "Persia"; and there is a hit at the
prodigious lying of the modern race, whose forefathers were so
famous as truth-tellers. "I am a Persian, but I am not lying
now," is a phrase familiar to every traveller.

[FN#26]  There is no such name: perhaps it is a clerical error
for "Har jáh"=(a man of) any place. I know an Englishman who in
Persian called himself "Mirza Abdullah-i-Híchmakáni"=Master
Abdullah of Nowhere.

[FN#27]  The Bresl. Edit. (loc. cit.) gives a comical description
of the Prince assuming the dress of an astrologer-doctor,
clapping an old book under his arm, fumbling a rosary of beads,
enlarging his turband, lengthening his sleeves and blackening his
eyelids with antimony. Here, however, it would be out of place.
Very comical also is the way in which he pretends to cure the
maniac by "muttering unknown words, blowing in her face, biting
her ear," etc.

[FN#28]  Arab. "Sar'a"=falling sickness. Here again we have in
all its simplicity the old nursery idea of "possession" by evil
spirits.

[FN#29]  Arab. "Nafahát"=breathings, benefits, the Heb. Neshamah
opp. to Nephesh (soul) and Ruach (spirit). Healing by the breath
is a popular idea throughout the East and not unknown to Western
Magnetists and Mesmerists. The miraculous cures of the Messiah
were, according to Moslems, mostly performed by aspiration. They
hold that in the days of Isa, physic had reached its highest
development, and thus his miracles were mostly miracles of
medicine; whereas, in Mohammed's time, eloquence had attained its
climax and accordingly his miracles were those of eloquence, as
shown in the Koran and Ahádís.

[FN#30]  Lit. "The rose in the sleeves or calyces." I take my
English equivalent from Jeremy Taylor, "So I have seen a rose
newly springing from the clefts of its hood," etc.

[FN#31]  These lines are from the Bresl. Edit. (v. 35). The four
couplets in the Mac. Edit. are too irrelevant.

[FN#32]  Polo, which Lane calls "Goff."

[FN#33]  Arab. "Muffawak"=well-notched, as its value depends upon
the notch. At the end of the third hemistitch Lane's Shaykh very
properly reads "baghtatan" (suddenly) for "burhatan"=during a
long time.

[FN#34]  "Uns" (which the vulgar pronounce Anas) "al-
Wujud"=Delight of existing things, of being, of the world. Uns wa
jud is the normal pun=love-intimacy and liberality; and the
caranomasia (which cannot well be rendered in English) re-appears
again and again. The story is throughout one of love; hence the
quantity of verse.

[FN#35]  The allusion to a "written N" suggests the elongated not
the rounded form of the letter as in Night cccxxiv.

[FN#36]  The fourteenth Arabic letter in its medial form
resembling an eye.

[FN#37]  This is done by the man passing his fingers over the
brow as if to wipe off perspiration; the woman acknowledges it by
adjusting her head-veil with both hands. As a rule in the Moslem
East women make the first advances; and it is truly absurd to see
a great bearded fellow blushing at being ogled. During the
Crimean war the fair sex of Constantinople began by these
allurements but found them so readily accepted by the Giaours
that they were obliged to desist.

[FN#38]  The greatest of all explorers and discoverers of the
world will be he who finds a woman confessing inability to keep a
secret.

[FN#39]  The original is intensely prosaic—and so am I.

[FN#40]  Arab. "Sunnat," the practice of the Prophet. For this
prayer and other silly and superstitious means of discovering the
"right direction" (which is often very wrongly directed) see
Lane, M.E. chapt. xi.

[FN#41]  Arab. "Bahr (sea or river) al-Kunuz": Lane (ii. 576)
ingeniously identifies the site with the Upper Nile whose tribes,
between Assouan (Syene) and Wady al-Subu'a are called the
"Kunuz"—lit. meaning "treasures" or "hoards." Philae is still
known as the "Islet of Anas (for Uns) al-Wujud;" and the learned
and accurate Burckhardt (Travels in Nubia p. 5) records the local
legend that a mighty King called Al-Wujud built the Osirian
temples. I can give no information concerning Jabal al-Sakla
(Thakla), the Mount of the woman bereft of children, beyond the
legend contained in Night ccclxxix.

[FN#42]  A religious mendicant (lit. a pauper), of whom there are
two great divisions. The Shara'i acts according to the faith: the
others (La Shara'i, or irreligious) are bound by no such
prejudices and are pretty specimens of scoundrels. (Pilgrimage
i.22.)

[FN#43]  Meaning his lips and palate were so swollen by drought.

[FN#44]  It is a pious act in time of mortal danger to face the
Kiblah or Meccan temple, as if standing in prayer.

[FN#45]  Still the belief of the Badawi who tries to work upon
the beast's compassion: "O great King I am a poor man, with wife
and family, so spare me that Allah spare thee!" and so forth. If
not famished the lion will often stalk off looking behind him as
he goes; but the man will never return by the same path; "for,"
says he, "haply the Father of Roaring may repent him of a wasted
opportunity." These lion-tales are very common, witness that of
Androcles at Rome and a host of others. Una and her lion is
another phase. It remained for M. Jules Gerard, first the
chasseur and then the tueur, du lion, to assail the reputation of
the lion and the honour of the lioness.

[FN#46]  Abu Haris=Father of spoils: one of the lion's hundred
titles.

[FN#47]  "They" again for "she."

[FN#48]  Jaxartes and Oxus. The latter (Jayhun or Amu, Oxus or
Bactros) is famous for dividing Iran from Turan, Persia from
Tartaria. The lands to its north are known as Ma wara al-Nahr
(Mawerannahar) or "What is behind the stream,"=Transoxiana and
their capitals were successively Samarcand and Bokhara.

[FN#49]  Arab. "Dani was gharib"=friend and foe. The lines are
partly from the Mac. Edit. and partly from the Bresl. Edit., v.
55.

[FN#50]  Arab. "Wa Rahmata-hu!" a form now used only in books.

[FN#51]  Before noted. The relationship, like that of foster-
brother, has its rights, duties and privileges.

[FN#52]  Arab. "Istikharah," before explained as praying for
direction by omens of the rosary, opening the Koran and reading
the first verse sighted, etc., etc. At Al-Medinah it is called
Khirah and I have suggested (Pilgrimage, ii. 287) that it is a
relic of the Azlam or Kidah (divining arrows) of paganism. But
the superstition is not local: we have the Sortes Virgilianae
(Virgil being a magician) as well as Coranicae.

[FN#53]  Arab. "Wujud al-Habib," a pun, also meaning, "Wujud my
beloved."

[FN#54]  Arab. "Khilal," as an emblem of attenuation occurring in
Al-Hariri (Ass. of Alexandria, etc.); also thin as a spindle
(Maghzal), as a reed, and dry as a pair of shears. In the Ass. of
Barka'id the toothpick is described as a beautiful girl. The use
of this cleanly article was enjoined by Mohammed:--"Cleanse your
mouths with toothpicks; for your mouths are the abode of the
guardian angels; whose pens are the tongues, and whose ink is the
spittle of men; and to whom naught is more unbearable than
remains of food in the mouth." A mighty apparatus for a small
matter; but in very hot lands cleanliness must rank before
godliness.

[FN#55]  The sense is ambiguous. Lane renders the verse:--"Thou
resemblest it (rose) not of my portion" and gives two
explanations "because HE is of my portion," or, "because HIS
cheek cannot be rosy if MINE is not." Mr. Payne boldly
translates—

"If the rose ape his cheek, 'Now God forfend,' I say, 'That of my
portion aught to pilfer thou shouldst try'."

[FN#56]  Arab. "lif" (not "fibres which grow at the top of the
trunk," Lane ii. 577); but the fibre of the fronds worked like
the cocoa-nut fibre which forms the now well-known Indian "coir."
This "lif" is also called "filfil" or "fulfil" which Dr. Jonathan
Scott renders "pepper" (Lane i. 8) and it forms a clean
succedaneum for one of the uncleanest articles of civilisation,
the sponge. It is used in every Hammam and is (or should be)
thrown away after use.

[FN#57]  Arab. "Shinf;" a course sack, a "gunny-bag;" a net
compared with such article.

[FN#58]  The eunuch tells him that he is not a "Sandali"=one
whose penis and testes are removed; and consequently the highest
valued. There are many ways of making the castrato; in some (as
here) only the penis is removed, in other the testes are bruised
or cut off; but in all cases the animal passion remains, for in
man, unlike other animals, the fons veneris is the brain. The
story of Abelard proves this. Juvenal derided the idea of married
eunuchs and yet almost all of these neutrals have wives with whom
they practise the manifold plaisirs de la petite oie
(masturbation, tribadism, irrumation, tete-beche, feuille-de-
rose, etc.), till they induce the venereal orgasm. Such was the
account once given to me by a eunuch's wife; and I need hardly
say that she, like her confrerie, was to be pitied. At the
critical moment she held up a little pillow for her husband to
bite who otherwise would have torn her cheeks or breasts.

[FN#59]  In real life the eunuch, as a rule, avoids all allusion
to his misfortune, although the slave will often describe his
being sold merrily enough.

[FN#60]  The visits are in dreamland. The ringdove thanks the
Lord for her (his?) suffering in the holy martyrdom of love.

[FN#61]  Arab. "Hazar;" I have explained it as meaning "(the bird
of) a thousand (songs)." 

[FN#62]  The "Bulbul" had his day with us but he departed with
Tommy Moore. We usually English the word by "nightingale;" but it
is a kind of shrike or butcher-bird (Lanius Boulboul. Lath.).

[FN#63]  The "Hamam" is a lieu commun in Arabic poetry. I have
noticed the world-wide reverence for the pigeon and the
incarnation of the Third Person of the Hindu Triad (Shiva), as
Kapoteshwara (Kapota-ishwara)"=pigeon or dove-god (Pilgrimage
iii. 218).

[FN#64]  Arab. "Hamam al-Ayk." Mr. Payne's rendering is so happy
that we must either take it from him or do worse.

[FN#65]  All primitive peoples translate the songs of birds with
human language; but, as I have noticed, the versions differ
widely. The pigeon cries, "Allah! Allah!" the dove "Karim, Tawwa"
(Bountiful, Pardoner!) the Kata or sand-grouse "Man sakat salam"
(who is silent is safe) yet always betrays itself by its lay of
"Kat-ta" and lastly the cock "Uzkuru 'llah ya ghafilun"
(Remember, or take the name of Allah, ye careless!).

[FN#66]  "Nay," the Dervish's reed pipe, symbol of the sighing
absent lover (i.e. the soul parted from the Creator) so famed by
the Mullah-i-Rum and Sir William Jones.

[FN#67]  Ba'albak=Ba'al (the God)-city (bek in Coptic and ancient
Egyptian.) Such, at least, is the popular derivation which awaits
a better. No cloth has been made there since the Kurd tribe of
gallant robbers known as the "Harfush" (or blackguards) lorded it
over old "Heliopolis."

[FN#68]  Thinking her to be a Jinn or Ghul in the shape of a fair
woman. This Arab is a strange contrast to the English fisherman,
and yet he is drawn with truth.

[FN#69]  Arab. "Habbaza!" (good this!) or "Habba" (how good!): so
"Habba bihi," how dear he is to me.

[FN#70]  Arab. "Zind," and "Zindah" the names of the two sticks,
upper and lower, hard and soft, by which fire was kindled before
flint and steel were known. We find it in Al-Hariri (Ass. of Banu
Haram) "no one sought ire from my fire-stick (i.e. from me as a
fire-stick) and failed." See Night dccciii.

[FN#71]  Arab. "Nazih" i.e. travelled far and wide.

[FN#72]  "Rajab," lit.="worshipping:" it is the seventh lunar
month and still called "Shahr-i-Khuda" (God's month) by the
Persians because in pre-Islamitic times it formed with Muharram
(or in its stead Safar), Zu 'l-ka'adah and Zu-'l-Hijjah (Nos. 1
or 2; 7,11 and 12) the yearly peace, during which a man might not
kill his father's murderer. The idea must have taken deep root,
as Arab history records only six "impious (or sacrilegious)
wars," waged despite the law. Europeans compare it with the
Treuga Dei (truce of God) a seven-years peace established about
A.D. 1032, by a Bishop of Aquitaine; and followed in A.D. 1245 by
the Pax Regis (Royal Peace) under Louis VIII. of France. This
compelled the relations of a murdered man to keep the peace for
forty days after the offence was committed.

[FN#73]  His Majesty wrote sad doggrel. He is better at
finessing, and his message was a trick because Rose-in-Hood had
told him that at home there were special obstacles to the
marriage.

[FN#74]  Arab. "Majzub"=drawn, attracted (literally); the popular
term for one absorbed in the contemplation of the Deity. During
this process the soul is supposed to quit the body leaving the
latter irresponsible for its actions. I remember a scandal being
caused in a village near Tunis by one of these men who suddenly
started up from his seat in a dusty corner and, in presence of a
small crowd of people, had connection with a she-donkey. The
supporters of the holy man declared that the deed was proof
positive of his exceptional holiness; but there were lewd
fellows, Moslems Voltaireans, who had their doubts and held that
the reverend man had so acted "for the gallery." A similar story
is told with due reserve by the late Abbe Hamilton in his book on
the Cyrenaic. There are three grand divisions of the Sufis; (1)
Mukiman, the stationaries; (2) Salikan, the travellers, or
progressives, and (3) Wasilan, those who reach the desired end.
And No. 2 has two classes: the Salik-i-majzub, one progressing in
Divine Love; and the other, who has made greater progress, is the
Majzub-i-Salik (Dabistan iii. 251).

[FN#75]  Arab. "Sundus," a kind of brocade (low Lat. brocare to
figure cloth), silk worked in high relief with gold and silver.
The idea is figurative meaning it was hung outside and inside
with fine stuff, like the Ka'abah, the "Bride of Meccah." The
"lords" means simply the lost girl.

[FN#76]  Arab. "Ayn" lit. eye, also a fount, "the eye of the
landscape" (a noble simile); and here a helper, guard, assistant.

[FN#77]  "Lord" for lady, i.e. she.

[FN#78]  Arab. "Fi'l-khawafik"=in the four quarters or among the
flappers (standards) or amid palpitations of heart. The bride
alludes to a festal reception in a town, with burning incense,
drums, flags, etc., etc.

[FN#79]  In Egypt the shorter "honey-moon" lasts a week; and on
the seventh day (pop. called Al-Subu'a) bride and bridegroom
receive visits with all ceremony, of course in separate
apartments. The seventh day (like the fortieth, the end of six
months and the anniversary) is kept for births and deaths with
Khatmahs (perlections) of the Koran "Saylah" family gatherings
and so forth. The fortieth day ends the real honey-moon. See
Night dccxcii.

[FN#80]  I have noted the popular practice, amongst men as well
as women, of hiring the Hammam for private parties and picnicking
in it during the greater part of the day. In this tale the bath
would belong to the public and it was a mere freak of the bride
to bathe with her bridegroom. "Respectable" people do not.

[FN#81]  She speaks in the last line as the barber or the
bathman.

[FN#82]  Here the "Ana" begin; and they mostly date themselves. 
Of the following forty-nine, Lane (vol. Ii. P. 578 et seq.) gives
only twenty-two and transforms them to notes in chapt. xviii.  He
could hardly translate several of them in a work intended to be
popular.  Abu Nowás is a person carefully to be avoided; and all
but anthropological students are advised to "skip" over anecdotes
in which his name and abominations occur.

[FN#83]  Arab. "Ghilmán," the counter part, I have said, of the
so-called "Houris."

[FN#84]  Mosul boasts of never having been polluted with
idolatrous worship, an exemption which it owes to being a
comparatively modern place.

[FN#85]  The Aleppines were once noted for debauchery; and the
saying is still "Halabi Shelebi" (for Chelebi)=the Aleppine is a
fellow fine.

[FN#86]  Mr. Payne omits the last line.  It refers to what
Persian boys call, in half-Turkish phrase, "Alish Takish," each
acting woman after he has acted man.  The best wine is still made
in monasteries and the co-called Sinai convent is world-famous
for its "Ráki" distilled from raisins.

[FN#87]  i.e. what a difference there is between them!

[FN#88]  Arab. "Salli ala 'l-Nabi," a common phrase; meaning not
only praise hm to avert the evil eye; but also used when one
would impose silence upon a babbler.  The latter will shuffle off
by ejaculating "Al" and continue his chatter.  (Pilgrimage
ii.279.)

[FN#89]  Arab. "Sukát" (plur. of Sáki, cupbearer, our old
"skinker"): the pure gold (tibr) is the amber-coloured wine, like
the Vino d'oro of the Libanus.

[FN#90]  That is, fair, white and read: Turkish slaves then
abounded at Baghdad.

[FN#91]  A Wady near Meccah where one of Mohammed's battles was
fought.  The line means his waist is a thread connected broad
breast and large hind quarters.

[FN#92]  Arab. "Zaurá" which may mean crooked, alluding to the
well-known rib.

[FN#93]  A pun.  Bakr was the name of the eponymus chief and it
also means virgin, as in Abu Bakr.

[FN#94]  Arab. "Jámi'ayn"=two cathedrals, any large (and
consequently vicious) city.

[FN#95]  Arab. "Almá," before noticed: I cannot translate
"damask-lipped" to suit European taste.

[FN#96]  Sherbet flavoured with musk or apple to cool the mouth
of "hot coppers."

[FN#97]  Arab. "In'ásh" lit. raising from his bier.  The whole
tone is rollicking and slangy.

[FN#98]  i.e. In spite of himself: the phrase often occurs.

[FN#99]  Europeans usually write "Beni" for "Banu;" the oblique
for the nominative.  I prefer "Odhrah" or "Ozrah" to Udhrah;
because the Ayn before the Zál takes in pronunciation the more
open sound.

[FN#100]   Possibly meaning that they were shrouded together;
this would be opposed to Moslem sense of decorum in modern days,
but the ancient were not so squeamish.  See Night cccxi.

[FN#101]   This phase of passion in the "varium et mutabile" is
often treated of by Oriental storytellers, and not unoften seen
in real Eastern life.

[FN#102]   As has been said, "Sáhib" (preceding the name not
following it as in India) is a Wazirial title in mediæval Islam.

[FN#103]   This parapet was rendered obligatory by Moses (Deut.
xxii. 8) on account of the danger of leaving a flat roof without
garde-fou.  Eastern Christians neglect the precaution and often
lose their children by the neglect.

[FN#104]   Arab. "Lauh." A bit of thin board washed white used
for lessons as slates are amongst us, and as easily cleaned
because the inks contain no minerals.  It is a long parallelogram
with triangular ears at the short sides; and the shape must date
from ages immemorial as it is found, throughout Syria and its
adjoinings, in the oldest rock inscriptions to which the form
serves as a frame.  Hence the "abacus" or counting table derived
from the Gr.     , a slab (or in Phenician "sand"), dust or sand
in old days having been strewed on a table or tablet for school-
boys' writings and mathematical diagrams.

[FN#105]   A pre-Islamic bard and friend to Tarafah the poet of
the Suspended or "Prize Poem."  The tale is familiar to all the
Moslem East.  Tarafah's Laura was one Khaulá.

[FN#106]   King of Hirah in Chaldæa, a drunken and bloodthirsty
tyrant.  When offended by the lampoons of the two poets he sent
them with litteræ Bellerophontiæ to the Governor of Al-Bahrayn. 
Al-Mutalammis "smelt a rat" and destroyed his charged, but
Tarafah was mutilated and buried alive, the victim of a trick
which is old as (and older than) good King David and Uriah.  Of
course neither poet could read.

[FN#107]   On this occasion, and in presence of the women only,
the groom first sees or is supposed to see the face of his wife. 
It is, I have said, the fashion for both to be greatly overcome
and to appear as if about to faint: the groom looks especially
ridiculous when so attitudinising.

[FN#108]   This leisurely operation of the "deed of kind" was
sure to be noticed; but we do not find in The Nights any allusion
to that systematic prolongatio veneris which is so much
cultivated by Moslems under the name Imsák = retention,
withholding i.e. the semen.  Yet Eastern books on domestic
medicine consist mostly of two parts; the first of general
prescriptions and the second of aphrodisiacs especially those qui
prolongent le plaisir as did the Gaul by thinking of sa pauvre
mère.  The Ananga-Ranga, by the Reverend Koka Pandit before
quoted, gives a host of recipes which are used, either externally
or internally, to hasten the paroxysm of the woman and delay the
orgasm of the man (p. 27).  Some of these are curious in the
extreme.  I heard of a Hindi who made a candle of frogs' fat and
fibre warranted to retain the seed till it burned out; it failed
notably because, relying upon it, he worked too vigorously.  The
essence of the "retaining art" is to avoid over-tension of the
muscles and to pre-occupy the brain: hence in coition Hindus will
drink sherbet, chew betel-nut and even smoke.  Europeans ignoring
the science and practice, are contemptuously compared with
village-cocks by Hindu women who cannot be satisfied, such is
their natural coldness, increased doubtless by vegetable diet and
unuse of stimulants, with less than twenty minutes.  Hence too
while thousands of Europeans have cohabited for years with and
have had families by "native women," they are never loved by
them:--at least I never heard of a case.

[FN#109]   Abu 'l Abbas al-Rakáshi, a poet of the time.  The
saying became proverbial (Burckhardt's A. Proverbs No. 561) and
there are variants, e.g. The night's promise is spread with
butter that melteth when day ariseth.

[FN#110]   Koran xxvi. 5,6 or "And those who err (Arab. Al-
gháwún) follow the footsteps of the poets," etc.

[FN#111]   Half-brother of Abdullah bin al-Zubayr, the celebrated
pretender.

[FN#112]   Grand-daughter of the Caliph Abu Bakr and the most
beautiful woman of her day.

[FN#113]   The Calc. Edit. by mistake reads "Izzah."  Torrens
(notes i.-xi.) remarks "The word Ghoonj is applied to this sort
of blandishment (i.e. an affected gait), and says Burckhardt
(Prov. No. 685), "The women of Cairo flatter themselves that
their Ghoonj is superior to that of all other females in the
Levant."  But Torrens did not understand and Burckhardt would not
explain "Ghunj" except by "assumed airs" (see No. 714).  It here
means the art of moving in coition, which is especially affected,
even by modest women, throughout the East and they have many
books teaching the genial art.  In China there are professors,
mostly old women, who instruct young girls in this branch of the
gymnastic.

[FN#114]   When reciting the Fátihah (opening Koranic chapter),
the hands are held in this position as if to receive a blessing
falling from Heaven; after which both palms are passed down the
face to distribute it over the eyes and other organs of sense.

[FN#115]   The word used is "bizá'at" = capital or a share in a
mercantile business.

[FN#116]  This and the following names are those of noted
traditionists of the eighth century, who derive back to Abdallah
bin Mas'úd, a "Companion of the Apostle."  The text shows the
recognised formula of ascription for quoting a "Hadís" = saying
of Mohammed; and sometimes it has to pass through half a dozen
mouths.

[FN#117]   Traditionists of the seventh and eighth centuries who
refer back to the "Father of the Kitten" (Abu Horayrah), an uncle
of the Apostle.

[FN#118]   Eastern story-books abound in these instances.  Pilpay
says in "Kalilah was Dimnah," "I am the slave of what I have
spoken and the lord of what I keep hidden."  Sa'adi follows suit,
"When thou speakest not a word, thou hast thy hand upon it; when
it is once spoken it hath laid its hand on thee."  Caxton, in the
"Dyctes, or Sayings of Philosophers" (printed in 1477) uses
almost the same words.

[FN#119]   i.e. for her husband's and her sin in using a man like
a beast.

[FN#120]   See the Second Lady's story (tantôt Kadi, tantôt
bandit), pp. 20-26 by my friend Yacoub Artin Pasha in the
Bulletin before quoted, series ii. No. 4 of 1883.  The sharpers'
trick is common in Eastern folk-lore, and the idea that underlies
is always metempsychosis or metamorphosis.  So, in the Kalilah wa
Dimnah (new Syriac), the three rogues persuade the ascetic that
he is leading a dog not a sheep.

[FN#121]   This is the popular prejudice and it has doubtless
saved many a reputation.  The bat is known to Moslems as the Bird
of Jesus, a legend derived by the Koran from the Gospel of
Infancy (1 chapt. xv. Hone's Apocryphal New Testament), in which
the boy Jesus amuses herself with making birds of clay and
commanding them to fly when (according to the Moslems) they
became bats.  These Apocryphal Gospels must be carefully read, if
the student would understand a number of Moslem allusions to the
Injíl which no Evangel contains.

[FN#122]   Because it quibbled away out of every question, a
truly diplomatic art.

[FN#123]   This Caliph, the orthodox Abbaside of Egypt (A.D.
1261) must not be confounded with the Druze-god, the heretical
Fatimite (A.D. 996-1021).  D'Herbelot (Hakem") gives details. 
Mr. S.L. Poole (The Academy, April 26, '79) is very severe on the
slip of Mr. Payne.

[FN#124]   The beautiful name is Persian "Anúshín-rawán" = Sweet
of Soul; and the glorious title of this contemporary of Mohammed
is "Al-Malik al-Adil" = the Just King.  Kisra, the Chosroë per
excellentiam, is also applied to the godly Guebre of whom every
Eastern dictionary gives details.

[FN#125]   "Sultan" is here an anachronism: I have noted that the
title was first assumed independently by Mohammed of Ghazni after
it had been conferred by the Caliph upon his father the Amir Al-
Umará (Mayor of the Palace), Sabuktagin A.D. 974.

[FN#126]   The "Sakká" or water-carrier race is peculiar in Egypt
and famed for trickery and intrigue.  Opportunity here as
elsewhere makes the thief.

[FN#127]   A famous saying of Mohammed is recorded when an
indiscretion of his young wife Ayishah was reported to him,
"There be no adultress without an adulterer (of a husband)." 
Fatimah the Apostle's daughter is supposed to have remained a
virgin after bearing many children: this coarse symbolism of
purity was known to the classics (Pausanias), who made Juno
recover her virginity by bathing in a certain river every year. 
In the last phrase, "Al-Salaf" (ancestry) refers to Mohammed and
his family.

[FN#128]  Khusrau Parwiz, grandson of Anushirwan, the Guebre King
who tore his kingdom by tearing Mohammed's letter married the
beautiful Maria or Irene (in Persian "Shírín = the sweet)
daughter of the Greek Emperor Maurice: their loves were sung by a
host of poets; and likewise the passion of the sculptor Farhád
for the same Shirin.  Mr. Lyall writes "Parwêz" and holds
"Parwíz" a modern form.

[FN#129]   he could afford it according to historians.  His
throne was supported by 40,000 silver pillars; and 1,000 globes,
hung in the dome, formed an orrery, showing the motion of the
heavenly bodies; 30,000 pieces of embroidered tapestry overhung
the walls below were vaults full of silver, gold and gems.

[FN#130]   Arab.  "Khunsá," meaning also a catamite as I have
explained.  Lane (ii. 586) has it; "This fish is of a mixed
kind." (!).

[FN#131]   So the model lovers became the ordinary married
couple.

[FN#132]   Arab. "Jamm." Heb. "Yamm."  Al-Haríri (Ass. Of Sinjar
and Sáwah) uses the rare form Yam for sea or ocean.

[FN#133]   Al-Hadi, immediate predecessor of Harun al-Rashid,
called "Al-Atbik": his upper lip was contracted and his father
placed a slave over him when in childhood, with orders to say,
"Musa! atbik!" (draw thy lips together) when he opened his mouth.

[FN#134]   Immediate successor of Harun al-Rashid.  Al-Amin is an
imposing physical figure, fair, tall, handsome and of immense
strength; according to Al-Mas'údi, he killed a lion with his own
hands; but his mind and judgement were weak.  He was fond of
fishing; and his reply to the courtier bringing important news,
"Confound thee! leave me! for Kausar (an eunuch whom he loved)
hath caught two fish and I none," reminds one of royal frivolity
in France.

[FN#135]   Afterwards governor in Khorasan under Al-Maamun.

[FN#136]   Intendant of the palace under Harun al-Rashid.

[FN#137]   Moslem women have this advantage over their Western
sisterhood: they can always leave the house of father or husband
and, without asking permission, pay a week or ten days' visit to
their friends.  But they are not expected to meet their lovers.

[FN#138]   The tale of "Susannah and the Elders" in Moslem form. 
Dániyál is the Arab Daniel, supposed to have been buried at
Alexandria.  (Pilgrimage, i. 16.)

[FN#139]   According to Moslem law, laid down by Mohammed on a
delicate occasion and evidently for a purpose, four credible
witnesses are required to prove fornication, adultery, sodomy and
so forth; and they must swear that actually saw rem in re, the
"Kohl-needle in the Kohl-étui," as the Arabs have it.  This
practically prevents conviction and the sabre cuts the Gordian
knot.

[FN#140]   Who, in such case, would represent our equerry.

[FN#141]   The Badawi not only always tells the truth, a perfect
contrast with the townsfolk; he is blunt in speech addressing his
Sultan "O Sa'íd!" and he has a hard rough humour which we may
fairly describe as "wut."  When you chaff him look out for falls.

[FN#142]   The answer is as old as the hills, teste the tale of
what happened when Amasis (who on horseback) raised his leg,
"broke wind and bad the messenger carry it back to Apries." 
Herod. Ii. 162.  But for the full significance of the Badawi's
most insulting reply see the Tale of Abu Hasan in Night ccccxi.

[FN#143]   Arab.  "Yá sáki" al-Dakan" meaning long bearded
(foolish) as well as frosty bearded.

[FN#144]   P. N. of the tribe, often mentioned in The Nights.

[FN#145]   Adnan, which whom Arab genealogy begins, is generally
supposed to be the eighth (Al-Tabari says the fortieth)
descendant from Ishmael and nine generations are placed between
him and Fahr (Fihr) Kuraysh.  The Prophet cut all disputes short
by saying, "Beyond Adnan none save Allah wotteth and the
genealogists lie."  (Pilgrimage ii. 344)  M.C. de Perceval dates
Adnan about B.C. 130.

[FN#146]   Koran xxxiii., 38.

[FN#147]   Arab.  "Arab al-Arabá," as before noticed (vol. i. 12)
the pure and genuine blood as opposed to the "Musta'aribah," the
"Muta'arribah," the "Mosarabians" and other Araboids; the first
springing from Khatan (Yaktan?) and the others from Adnan. And
note that "Arabi" = a man of pure Arab race, either of the Desert
or of the city,  while A'arábi applies only to the Desert man,
the Badawi.

[FN#148]   Koran xxxviii. 2, speaking of the Unbelievers (i.e.
non-Moslems) who are full of pride and contention.

[FN#149]   One of the Asháb, or Companions of the Apostle, that
is them who knew him personally.  (Pilgrimage ii. 80, etc.)  The
Asháb al-Suffah (Companions of the bench or sofa) were certain
houseless Believers lodged by the Prophet. (Pilgrimage ii. 143).

[FN#150]   Hence Omar is entitled "Al-Adil = the Just."  Readers
will remember that by Moslem law and usage murder and homicide
are offences to be punished by the family, not by society or its
delegates.  This system reappears in civilisation under the
denomination of "Lynch Law," a process infinitely distasteful to
lawyers (whom it abolishes) and most valuable when administered
with due discretion.

[FN#151]   Lane translates (ii. 592) "from a desire of seeing the
face of God;" but the general belief of Al-Islam is that the
essence of Allah's corporeal form is different from man's.  The
orthodox expect to "see their Lord on Doom-day as they see the
full moon" (a tradition).  But the Mu'atazilites deny with the
existence of matter the corporiety of Alah and hold that he will
be seen only with the spiritual eyes, i.e. of reason.

[FN#152]  See Gesta Romanorum, Tale cviii., "of Constancy in
adhering to Promises," founded on Damon and Pythias or, perhaps,
upon the Arabic.

[FN#153]   Arab.  "Al-Ahrám," a word of unknown provenance.  It
has been suggested that the singular form (Haram), preceded by
the Coptic article "pi" (= the) suggested to the Greeks
"Pyramis."  But this word is still sub judice and every
Egyptologist seems to propose his own derivation. Brugsch (Egypt
i. 72) makes it Greek, the Egyptian being "Abumir," while "pir-
am-us" = the edge of the pyramid, the corners running from base
to apex.  The Egyptologist proves also what the Ancients either
ignored or forgot to mention, that each pyramid had its own name.

[FN#154]   Arab.  "Ahkám," in this matter supporting the
"Pyramidologists."

[FN#155]   All imaginative.

[FN#156]   It has always been my opinion founded upon
considerations too long to detail, that the larger Pyramids
contain many unopened chambers.  Dr. Grant Bey of Cairo proposed
boring through the blocks as Artesian wells are driven.  I cannot
divine why Lane (ii, 592) chose to omit this tale, which is
founded on historic facts and interests us by suggesting a
comparison between Mediæval Moslem superstitions and those of our
xixth Century, which to our descendants will appear as wild, if
not as picturesque, as those of The Nights.  The "inspired
British inch" and the building by Melchisedek (the Shaykh of some
petty Syrian village) will compare not unaptly with the enchanted
swords, flexible glass and guardian spirits.  But the
Pyramidennarren is a race which will not speedily die out: it is
based on Nature, the Pyramids themselves.

[FN#157]   Arab.  "Rizm"; hence, through the Italian Risma our
ream (= 20 quires of paper, etc.), which our dictionaries derive
from        (!).  See "frail" in Night dcccxxxviii.

[FN#158]   Arab.  "Taríkah" = the path trodden by ascetics and
mystics in order to attain true knowledge (Ma'rifat in Pers.
Dánish).  These are extensive subjects: for the present I must
refer readers to the Dabistan, iii. 35 and iii. 29, 36-7.

[FN#159]   Alluding to the Fishár or "Squeeze of the tomb."  This
is the Jewish Hibbut hakkeber which all must endure, save those
who lived in the Holy Land or died on the Sabbath-eve (Friday
night).  Then comes the questioning by the Angels Munkar and
Nakir (vulgarly called Nákir and Nakír) for which see Lane (M.E.
chapt. xviii.).  In Egypt a "Mulakkin" (intelligencer) is hired
to prompt and instruct the dead.  Moslems are beginning to
question these facts of their faith: a Persian acquaintance of
mine filled his dead father's mouth with flour and finding it in
loco on opening the grave, publicly derided the belief.  But the
Mullahs had him on the hip, after the fashion of reverends,
declaring that the answers were made through the whole body, not
only by the mouth.  At last the Voltairean had to quit Shiraz.

[FN#160]   Arab. "Walí" = a saint, Santon (Ital. Form) also a
slave.  See in Richardson (Dissert. iii.), an illustration of the
difference between Wali and Wáli as exemplified by the Caliph al-
Kádir and Mahmúd of Ghazni.

[FN#161]   Arab.  "Tín" = the tenacious clay puddled with chaff
which serves as mortar for walls built of Adobe or sun dried
brick.  I made a mistake in my Pilgrimage (i.10) translating Ras
al-Tín the old Pharos of Alexandria, by "Headland of Figs."  It
is Headland of Clay, so called from the argile there found and
which supported an old pottery.

[FN#162]   The danik (Pers. Dang) is the sixth of a dirham.  Mr.
S. L. Poole (The Acad. April 26, '79) prefers his uncle's
translation "a sixth" (what of?) to Mr. Payne's "farthing."  The
latter at any rate is intelligible.
 
[FN#163]   The devotee was "Sáim al-dahr" i.e. he never ate nor
drank from daylight to dark throughout the year.

[FN#164]   The ablution of a common man differs from that of an
educated Moslem as much as the eating of a clown and a gentleman. 
Moreover there are important technical differences between the
Wuzu of the Sunni and the Shi'ah.

[FN#165]   i.e., by honouring his father.

[FN#166]   This young saint was as selfish and unnatural a sinner
as Saint Alexius of the Gesta Romanorum (Tale xv.), to whom my
friend, the late Thomas Wright, administered just and due
punishment.

[FN#167]   The verses are affecting enough, though by no means
high poetry.

[FN#168]   The good young man cut his father for two reasons:
secular power (an abomination to good Moslems) and defective
title to the Caliphate.  The latter is a trouble to Turkey in the
present day and with time will prove worse.

[FN#169]   Umm Amrí (written Amrú and pronounced Amr') a
matronymic, "mother of Amru."  This story and its terminal verse
is a regular Joe Miller.

[FN#170]   Abuse and derision of schoolmaster are staple subjects
in the East as in the West, (Quem Dii oderunt pædagogum
fecerunt).  Anglo-Indians will remember:

     "Miyán-ji ti-ti!
     Bachche-kí gánd men anguli kí thi!"
     ("Schoolmaster hum!
     Who fumbled and fingered the little boy's bum?")

[FN#171]   Arab.  "Mujawirin" = the lower servants, sweepers,
etc.  See Pilgrimage ii. 161, where it is also applied to certain
"settlers" at Al-Medinah.  Burckhardt (No. 480) notices another
meaning "foreigners who attend mosque-lectures" and quotes the
saying, "A. pilgrimaged:" quoth B. "yes! and for his villanies
resideth (Mujáwir) at Meccah."

[FN#172]   The custom (growing obsolete in Egypt) is preserved in
Afghanistan where the learned wear turbans equal to the canoe-
hats of the Spanish cardinals.

[FN#173]   Arab.  "Makmarah," a metal cover for the usual brasier
or pan of charcoal which acts as a fire-place.  Lane (ii. 600)
does not translate the word and seems to think it means a belt or
girdle, thus blunting the point of the dominie's excuse.

[FN#174]   This story, a very old Joe Miller, was told to Lane as
something new and he introduced it into his Modern Egyptians, end
of chapt. ii.

[FN#175]   This tale is a mere abbreviation of "The King and his
Wazir's Wife," in the Book of Sindibad or the Malice of Women,
Night dcxxviii., {which see for annotations}.

[FN#176]   The older "Roe" which may be written "Rukh" or
"Rukhkh." Colonel Yule, the
learned translator of Marco Polo, has shown that "Roc's" feathers
were not uncommon
curiosities in mediæval ages; and holds that they were mostly
fronds of the palm Raphia
vinifera, which has the largest leaf in the vegetable kingdom and
which the Moslems of
Zanzibar call "Satan's date-tree." I need hardly quote "Frate
Cipolla and the Angel Gabriel's Feather." (Decameron vi. 10.)

[FN#177]   The tale is told in a bald, disjointed style and will
be repeated in Sindbad the Seaman where I shall again notice the
"Roc." See Night dxxxvii., etc.

[FN#178]   Hírah in Mesopotamia was a Christian city and
principality subject to the Persian Monarchs; and a rival to the
Roman kingdom of Ghassán. It has a long history, for which see
D'Herbelot.

[FN#179]   A pre-Islamite poet.

[FN#180]   Arab. "Biká'a," alluding to the pilgrimages made to
monasteries and here equivalent to, "Address ye to the road,"
etc.

[FN#181]   Whose by name was Abu Ali, a poet under the Abbasides
(eighth and ninth centuries).

[FN#182]  A well-known quarter of Baghdad, often mentioned in The
Nights.

[FN#183]  Another well-known poet of the time.

[FN#184]   Arab. "Sardáb": noticed before.

[FN#185]  A gigantic idol in the Ka'abah, destroyed by Mohammed:
it gave name to a tribe.

[FN#186]  Arab. "Ya Kawwád:" hence the Port. and Span.
Alcoviteiro.

[FN#187]  Arab "Tufayli," a term before noticed; the class was as
well-known in Baghdad and Cairo as in ancient Rome.

[FN#188]  Arab. "Jauzar"=a bubalus (Antilope defessa), also
called "Aye" from the large black eyes. This bovine antelope is
again termed Bakar al-Wahsh (wild cattle) or "Bos Sylvestris"
(incerti generic, Forsk.). But Janzar also signifies hart, so I
render it by "Ariel" (the well-known antelope).

[FN#189]  Arab. "Taráib" plur. of taríbah. The allusion is to the
heart, and "the little him's a her."

[FN#190]  A well-known poet of the ninth century (A.D.).

[FN#191]  These easy deaths for love are a lieu common: See
sundry of them in the Decameron (iv. 7, etc.); and, in the
Heptameron (Nouv. Ixx.), the widow who lay down and died of love
and sorrow that her passion had become known. For the fainting of
lovers see Nouvelle xix.

[FN#192]  This is a favourite Badawi dish, but too expensive
unless some accident happen to the animal. Old camel is much like
bull-beef, but the young meat is excellent, although not relished
by Europeans because, like strange fish, it has no recognised
flavour. I have noticed it in my "First Footsteps" (p. 68, etc.).
There is an old idea in Europe that the maniacal vengeance of the
Arab is increased by eating this flesh, the beast is certainly
vindictive enough; but a furious and frantic vengefulness
characterises the North American Indian who never saw a camel.
Mercy and pardon belong to the elect, not to the miserables who
make up " humanity."

[FN#193]   i.e. of the Province Hazramaut, the Biblical
Hazarmaveth (Gen. x. 26). The people are the Swill of Arabia and
noted for thrift and hard bargains; hence the saying, If you meet
a serpent and a Hazrami, slay the Hazrami.  To prove how
ubiquitous they are it is related that a man, flying from their
society, reached the uttermost parts of China where he thought
himself safe.  But, as he was about to pass the night in some
ruin, he heard a voice bard by him exclaim, "O Imád al-Din!" 
(the name of the patron-saint of Hazramaut).  Thereupon he arose
and fled and he is, they say, flying still.

[FN#194]   Arab. "Fál" alluding to the Sortes Coranicæ and other
silly practices known to the English servant-girs when curious
about her future and her futur.

[FN#195]   i.e., in Arab-land (where they eat dates) and Ajam, or
lands non-Arab (where bread is the staff of life); that is, all
the world over.

[FN#196]   This story is curious and ethnologically valuable. The
Badawi who eructates as a civility, has a mortal hatred to a
crepitus ventris; and were a by-stander to laugh at its
accidental occurrence, he would at once be cut down as a
"pundonor." The same is the custom amongst the Highlanders of
Afghanistan, and its artificial nature suggests direct
derivation, for the two regions are separated by a host of
tribes, Persians and Baloch, Sindis and Panjábis who utterly
ignore the point of honour and behave like Europeans. The raids
of the pre-Islamitic Arabs over the lands lying to the north-east
of them are almost forgotten; still there are traces, and this
may be one of them.

[FN#197]   Arab. "Al-‘Ár." The Badawi saying is "Al-nár wa lá l-
‘ár" (Hell-)fire, but not shame. The sentiment is noble.  Hasan
the Prophet's grandson, a poor creature demoralised by over-
marrying, chose the converse, "Shame is better than Hell-fire." 
An old Arabic poem has,

     "The Fire and not shame be the Lord of thee
      And e'en to The Fire from shame go flee."

Al-Hariri (Ass. of the Badawin) also has,

     "For rather would I die my death than shame,--
      On bier be borne than bear a caitiff's name."

[FN#198] A grammarian and rhetorician of ninth century.

[FN#199]  Once existing in Syrian Hamáh (the Biblical Hamath);
and so called because here died the Emperor Heraclius called by
the Arabs "Hirakl."

[FN#200]  Till lately it was the custom to confine madmen in
Syrian monasteries, hoping a cure from the patron Saint, and a
terrible time they had of it. Every guide book relates the
healing process as formerly pursued at the Maronite Convent
Koshaya not far from Bayrut. The idiot or maniac was thrust
headlong by the monks into a dismal cavern with a heavy chain
round his neck, and was tied up within a span of the wall to
await the arrival of Saint Anthony who especially affects this
holy place. In very few weeks the patient was effectually cured
or killed by cold, solitude and starvation.

[FN#201]  The Moslem Eve, much nearer the Hebrew "Hawah" = the
"manifester," because (Gen. iii. 20) she was (to be) the mother
of all that live ("Kull hayy").

[FN#202]  The mad lover says "they" for "she," which would be too
familiar in speaking to strangers.

[FN#203]  i.e. falsely to report the death.

[FN#204]  A famous grammarian, etc., of the tenth century.

[FN#205]  The classical Amorium in Phrygia now Anatolia: Anbár is
a town (before mentioned) on the Euphrates; by the rules of
Arabic grammar the word is pronounced (though never written)
Ambár.

[FN#206]  "Art thou not the slave of the Messiah, the Ráhib
(monk)?" "No! I am the slave of Allah, the Rághib (desirous of
mercy from the Almighty). " A fair specimen of the Saj'a or
rhymed prose. Abdallah (properly "Abdu'llah:") is a kind of
neutral name, neither Jewish, Moslem nor Christian; hence I
adopted it, (Pilgrimage i. 20.)

[FN#207]  Arab. "Hanut," prop. a tavern where liquors are sold, a
term applied contemptuously to shops, inns, etc., kept by
Christians.

[FN#208]  Arab. "Shirk" = syntheism of the "Mushrik" (one who
makes other gods partners with God), a word pronounced "Mushrit"
by the Wahhabis and the Badawin.

[FN#209]  Koran vii. 195. The passage declaims against the idols
of the Arabs, sun, moon. stars, etc.

[FN#210]  This minor miracle is commonly reported, and is not, I
believe, unknown to modern "Spiritualism." The dead Wali or
Waliyah (Saintess) often impels the bier-bearers to the spot
where he would be buried: hence in Cairo the tombs scattered
about the city. Lane notices it, Mod. E. chaps. xxviii.

[FN#211]  Koran x. 36, speaking of being turned aside from the
true worship.

[FN#212]  One of the Wazirs of al-Maamun, Kurrat al-Ayn =
"coolness (i.e. delight) of the eyes" Ali bin Hishám surnamed
Abu'l-Hasan, was prefect of Baghdad under the same reign.

[FN#213]  The Mac. Edit. (ii. 448) reads for Kawáid (plur. of
Káid = Governors, Span. Alcayde) "Fawáid": hence Lane (ii. 606)
translates " try thy heart."

 [FN#214]  The mats of Sind were famous even in my day, but under
English rule native industries are killed out by Manchester and
Birmingham.

[FN#215]  Sajáh was the name of a famous female impostor, a
contemporary of "Musaylimah the Liar."

[FN#216]  A poet of Mohammed's day.

[FN#217]  A singer and composer of the first century (A. H.).

[FN#218]  Arab = a roe, a doe; also the Yoni (of women, mares and
bitches). It is the Heb. Tabitha and the Greek Dorcas.

[FN#219]  Within the Hudúd al-Harem (bounds of the Holy Places),
at Al-Medinah as well as Meccah, all "Muharramát" (forbidden
sins) are doubly unlawful, such as drinking spirits, immoral
life, etc. The Imam Malik forbids slaying animals without,
however, specifying any penalty. The felling of trees is a
disputed point; and no man can be put to death except invaders,
infidels and desecraters. (Pilgrimage ii. 167.)

[FN#220]  A poet of the first century (A.H.).

[FN#221]  In Arab. =a fawn beginning to walk, also the 28th lunar
mansion or station, usually known as Batn al-Hut or Whale's
belly. These mansions or houses, the constellations through which
the moon passes in her course along her orbit, are much used in
Moslem astrology and meteorology.

[FN#222]  Arab. Kalla-má = it is seldom (rare) that etc. used in
books.

[FN#223]  Dishonoured by his love being made public. So Hafiz,
Petrarch and Camoens.

[FN#224]  Sixth Abbaside, A.D. 809-813.

[FN#225]  Ala'llah, tenth Abbaside, A. H. 232-47 (847-61),
grandson of Al-Rashid who succeeded Al-Wásik. He was a fanatic
Sunni, much opposed to the Shi'ahs and he ordered the Christians
to wear round their necks the Ghull (collar of wood, iron, or
leather), to dress in yellow head-gear and girdles, use wooden
stirrups and place figures of devils in front of their
dwelling-houses. He also gave distinct dresses to their women and
slaves. The Ghull, or collar, was also used for a punishment and
vermin gathered under it when riveted round the neck: hence
Golius calls it "pediculosum columbar."

[FN#226]  Wazir of the above. killed by al-Muntasir Billah A. H.
247 (= 861).

[FN#227]  Easterns during purgation are most careful and deride
the want of precaution in Europeans. They do not leave the house
till all is passed off, and avoid baths, wine and women which
they afterwards resume with double zest. Here "breaking the seal"
is taking the girl's maidenhead.

[FN#228]  Johannes, a Greek favoured by Al-Mutawakkil and other
Abbaside Caliphs. 

[FN#229]  Lady of Shaykhs, elders in the faith and men of
learning

[FN#230]  = A.D. 1166.

[FN#231]  Koran iv. 38. I have before noted what the advantages
are.

[FN#232]  Koran ii. 282, "of those whom ye shall choose for
witnesses."

[FN#233]  Koran iv. 175, "Whereas if there be two sisters, they
inherit only two-thirds between them."

[FN#234]  The secondary meaning is "Fá'il" = the active sodomite
and "Mafa'úl" = the passive, a catamite: the former is not an
insulting word, the latter is a most injurious expression.
"Novimus et qui te!"

[FN#235]  It is an unpleasant fact that almost all the poetry of
Háfiz is addressed to youths, as we see by the occasional
introduction of Arabic (e.g., Afáka'lláh). Persian has no genders
properly so called, hence the effect is less striking. Sa'di, the
"Persian Moralist" begins one of the tales, "A certain learned
man fell in love with a beautiful son of a blacksmith," which
Gladwin, translating for the general, necessarily changed to
"daughter."

[FN#236]  The famous author of the Anthology called Al-Hamásah.

[FN#237]  i.e., teeth under the young mustachio.

[FN#238]  The "Silk man" and the celebrated author of the
Makámát, assemblies or seances translated (or attempted) into all
the languages of Europe. We have two in English, the first by
Theodore Preston, M.A. (London, Madden, 1850); but it contains
only twenty of the fifty pieces. The second by the late Mr.
Chenery (before alluded to) ends with the twenty-sixth assembly:
one volume in fact, the other never having been finished. English
readers, therefore, are driven to the grand edition of the
Makámát in folio by Baron Silvestre de Sacy.

[FN#239]  The sword of the eye has a Hamáil (baldrick worn over
right shoulder, Pilgrimage i. 352) to support the "Ghimd" (vulg.
Ghamad) or scabbard (of wood or leather): and this baldrick is
the young whisker.

[FN#240]  The conceit of "Suláfat" (ptisane, grape juice allowed
to drain on the slabs) and "Sawálif" (tresses, locks) has been
explained. The newest wine is the most inebriating, a fact not
much known in England, but familiar to the drinker of "Vino
novo."

[FN#241]  Koran xii. 51, this said by the nobleman's (Potiphar's)
wife who adds, "I selected him to lie with me; and he (Joseph) is
one of those who speak truth."

[FN#242]  Here we have a specimen of the strained Saj'a or
balanced prose: slave-girls (jawárí) are massed with flowing
tears (dam'u jári) on account of the Káfiyah or rhyme.

[FN#243]  The detected sodomite is punished with death according
to Moslem law, but again comes the difficulty of proof. At Shiraz
I have heard of a pious Moslem publicly executing his son.

[FN#244]  Koran xxvi. 165 et seq. The Lord speaks to the "people
of Lot" (Sodomites). Mr. Payne renders "Min al-álamíma," "from
the four corners of the world."

[FN#245]  Meaning before and behind, a Moslemah "Bet Balmanno."

[FN#246]  Arab. " Lúti," (plur. Lawátí), much used in Persian as
a buffoon, a debauchee, a rascal. The orig. sig. is "One of (the
people of) Lot." The old English was Ingle or Yngle (a bardachio,
a catamite, a boy kept for sodomy), which Minsheu says is, "Vox
hispanica et significat Latinè Inguen" (the groin). Our vulgar
modern word like the Italian bugiardo is pop. derived from Fr.
Bougre, alias Bulgarus, a Bulgarian, a heretic: hence Boulgrin
(Rabelais i. chaps. ii.) is popularly applied to the Albigeois
(Albigenses, whose persecution began shortly after A.D. 1200) and
the Lutherans. I cannot but think that "bougre" took its especial
modern signification after the French became acquainted with the
Brazil, where the Huguenots (in A.D. 1555) were founding a
Nouvelle France, alias Equinoctiale, alias Antarctique, and
whence the savages were carried as curiositie