s to Paris. Their
generic name was "Bugre" (properly a tribe in Southern Brazil,
but applied to all the redskins) and they were all born
Sodomites. More of this in the terminal Essay.

[FN#247]  His paper is the whiteness of his skin. I have quoted
the Persian saying of a young beard: "his cheeks don mourning for
his beauty's death."

[FN#248]  Arab. "Khabál," lit. the pus which flows from the
bodies of the damned.

[FN#249]  Most characteristic of Egypt is all this scene. Her
reverence, it is true, sits behind a curtain; but her virtue uses
language which would shame the lowest European prostitute; and
which is filthy almost as Dean Swift's.

[FN#250]  Arab. "Niyat:" the Moslem's idea of intentions quite
runs with the Christian's. There must be a "Niyat" or purpose of
prayer or the devotion is valueless. Lane tells a pleasant tale
of a thief in the Mosque, saying "I purpose (before Prayer) to
carry off this nice pair of new shoes!" 

[FN#251]  Arab. "Ya 'l-Ajúz" (in Cairo "Agooz" pronounced "Ago-o-
oz"): the address is now insulting and would elicit "The old
woman in thine eye" (with fingers extended). In Egypt the polite
address is "O lady (Sitt), O pilgrimess, O bride, and O daughter"
(although she be the wrong side of fifty). In Arabia you may say
"O woman (Imraah)" but in Egypt the reply would be "The woman
shall see Allah cut out thy heart!" So in Southern Italy you
address "bella fé" (fair one) and cause a quarrel by
"vecchiarella."

[FN#252] Governor of Egypt, Khorasan, etc. under Al-Maamun.

[FN#253] i.e., a companion, a solacer: it is also a man's name
(vol. i. xxiv.).

[FN#254] At Baghdad; evidently written by a Baghdad or Mosul man.

[FN#255] A blind traditionist of Bassorah (ninth century).

[FN#256] Arab. "Zaghab"=the chick's down; the warts on the
cucumber which sometimes develop into projections.

[FN#257] The Persian saying is, A kiss without moustachio is
bread without salt.

[FN#258] "And We will prove you with evil, and with good, for a
trial of you; and unto Us shall ye return." (Koran xxi. 36.) The
saying is always in the Moslem's mouth.

[FN#259] Arab. "Sunnat," lit.=a law, especially applied to the
habit and practice of the Apostle in religious and semi-religious
matters, completing the "Hadis," or his spoken words. Anything
unknown is entitled "Bida'ah"=innovation. Hence the strict Moslem
is a model Conservative whose exemplar of life dates from the
seventh century. This fact may be casuistically explained away;
but is not less an obstacle to all progress and it will be one of
the principal dangers threatening Al-Islam. Only fair to say that
an "innovation" introduced by a perfect follower of the Prophet
is held equal theoretically to a Sunnat; but vulgarly it is said,
"The rabble will not take gold which is not coined."

[FN#260] Arab. "Arsh"=the ninth Heaven, the Throne of the Deity,
above the Seven Heavens of the planets and the Primum Mobile
which, in the Ptolemaic system, sets them all in motion.

[FN#261] This description of a good Moslem's death is at once
concise, pathetic and picturesque.

[FN#262] This is the first mention of coffee; apparently
introduced by the scribe: the word rendered "coffee-makers" is
"Kahwajiyah"; an Arab. plur. of a Turkish termination (-ji) to an
Arab. word "Kahwah" (before noticed).

[FN#263] Picnics are still made to Rauzah (Rodah) island: I have
enjoyed many a one, but the ground is all private property.

[FN#264] Arab. "Hosh," plur. Híshán, the low courts surrounded by
mean lodgings which in "native" Cairo still contrast so strongly
with the "gingerbread" of the new buildings.

[FN#265] This is the Moslem equivalent of "thank you." He looks
upon the donor as the channel through which Allah sends him what
he wants and prays for more to come. Thus "May your shadow never
be less" means, May you increase in prosperity so that I may gain
thereby! And if a beggar is disposed to be insolent (a very
common case), he will tell you his mind pretty freely on the
subject, and make it evident to you that all you have is also his
and that La propriété (when not shared) est le vol.

[FN#266] I have noticed in my Pilgrimage (i. 51-53) the kindly
care with which the stranger is treated by Moslems, a marvellous
contrast to the ways of "civilization."

[FN#267] Arab. "Dimyat," vulg. pronounced "Dumíyat."

[FN#268] Where the door-keepers sit and receive their friends.

[FN#269] This is a traveller's 'Kit' in the East.

[FN#270] Arab. "Takht-rawán," from Persian meaning "moveable
throne."

[FN#271] The use of the expression proved the speaker to be a
Moslem Jinní.

[FN#272] The "haunted" house proper, known to the vulgar and to
spiritualists becomes, I have said, amongst Moslems a place
tenanted by Jinns.

[FN#273] Needless to say there never was a Sultan or a King of
Baghdad nor a Duke of Athens. This story would seem not to have
been written by the author of "the Emir bin Tahir," etc. Night
ccccxxiv.

[FN#274] Plur. of Álim=one learned in the law, a D.D. Mohammed
did his best to abolish the priest and his craft by making each
Moslem paterfamilias a pontifex in his own household and he
severely condemned monkery and celibacy. But human nature was too
much for him: even before his death ascetic associations began to
crop up. Presently the Olema in Al-Islam formed themselves into a
kind of clergy; with the single but highly important difference
that they must (or ought to) live by some honest secular calling
and not by the "cure of souls"; hence Mahomet IV. of Turkey was
solemnly deposed. So far and no farther Mohammed was successful
and his success has secured for him the lively and lasting hatred
of the ecclesiastical caste which he so honestly and wisely
attempted to abate. Even to the present day missionaries have a
good word for the Guebre and the Buddhist, the Brahmanist and the
Confucian, but none for the Moslem: Dr. Livingstone, for one
instance of many, evidently preferred the Fetichist, whom he
could convert, to the Unitarian Faithful whom he could not.

[FN#275] i.e. they recited seven times (an unusual number), for
greater solemnity, the opening Chapter of the Koran which does
general duty on such occasions as making covenants and swearing
fealty. This proclaiming a King by acclamation suggests the
origin of the old and venerable Portuguese institution.

[FN#276] By affixing his own seal and that of the King. This in
later times was supplanted by the "Tughrá," the imperial cypher
or counter-mark (much like a writing master's flourish), with
which Europe has now been made familiar through the agency of
Turkish tobacco.

[FN#277] Arab. "Wird"=the twenty-five last chapters of the Koran
which are repeated, one or more at a time, after the end of the
"Farz," or obligatory prayers and ad libitum with the Sunnat or
customary, and the Náfilah or supererogatory.

[FN#278] The sensible creed of Al-Islam freely allows
anthropophagy when it saves life; a contrast to the
sentimentalism of the West which brings a "charge of cannibalism"
against unfortunate expeditionists. I particularly allude to the
scandalous pulings of the English Press over the gallant and
unfortunate Greely voyage. (The Academy, Sept. 25, 1884.)

[FN#279] The story is mere Æsopic: the "Two dogs" contains it
all. One of Mohammed's sensible sayings is recorded and deserves
repetition:--"Empire endureth with infidelity (idolatry, etc.),
but not with tyranny."

[FN#280] This couplet occurs in Night xxi. (vol. i. 207); so I
give Torrens (p.207) by way of variety.

[FN#281] Lane (ii. 636) omits this tale, "as it would not only
require a volume of commentary but be extremely tiresome to most
readers." Quite true; but it is valuable to Oriental Students who
are beginning their studies, as an excellent compendium of
doctrine and practice according to the Shafi'í School.

[FN#282] Pronounced Aboo 'l-Husn = Father of Beauty, a fancy
name.

[FN#283] As in most hot climates so in Egypt the dead are buried
at once despite the risk of vivisepulture. This seems an instinct
with the Semitic (Arabian) race teste Abraham, as with the Gypsy.
Hence the Moslems have invoked religious aid. The Mishkát
al-Masábih (i. 387) makes Mohammed say, "When any one of you
dieth you may not keep him in the house but bear him quickly to
his grave"; and again, "Be quick in raising up the bier: for if
the dead have been a good man, it is good to bear him gravewards
without delay; and if bad, it is frowardness ye put from your
necks."

[FN#284] This biting of the hand in Al-Haríri expresses
bitterness of repentance and he uses more than once the Koranic
phrase (chapter vii., 148) "Sukita fí aydíhim," lit. where it
(the biting) was fallen upon their hands; i.e. when it repented
them; "sukita" being here not a passive verb as it appears, but
an impersonal form uncommon in Arabic. The action is instinctive,
a survival of the days when man was a snarling and snapping
animal (physically) armed only with claws and teeth.

[FN#285] Arab. "'Alam," applied to many things, an "old man" of
stones (Kákúr), a signpost with a rag on the top, etc.

[FN#286] The moon of Ramazan was noticed in Night ix. That of
Sha'aban (eighth month) begins the fighting month after the
conclusion of the Treuga Dei in Rajab. See Night ccclxxviii.

[FN#287] These lines have occurred in Night cccxix. I give Mr.
Payne's version for variety.

[FN#288] i.e. in her prime, at fourteen to fifteen.

[FN#289] i.e. pale and yellow.

[FN#290] The word means the wood; but it alludes to a preparation
made by levigating it on a stone called in India "Sandlásá." The
gruel-like stuff is applied with the right hand to the right side
of the neck, drawing the open fingers from behind forwards so as
to leave four distinct streaks, then down to the left side, and
so on to the other parts of the body.

[FN#291] Arab. "Haykal" which included the Porch, the Holy and
the Holy of Holies. The word is used as      in a wider sense by
Josephus A. J. v. v. 3. In Moslem writings it is applied to a
Christian Church generally, on account of its images.

[FN#292] These lines having occurred before, I here quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#293] Arab writers often mention the smile of beauty, but
rarely, after European fashion, the laugh, which they look upon
as undignified. A Moslem will say "Don't guffaw (Kahkahah) in
that way; leave giggling and grinning to monkeys and Christians."
The Spaniards, a grave people, remark that Christ never laughed.
I would draw the reader's attention to a theory of mine that the
open-hearted laugh has the sound of the vowels a and o; while e,
i, and u belong to what may be roughly classed as the rogue
order.

[FN#294] i.e. gaining the love of another, love.

[FN#295] i.e. the abrogated passages and those by which they are
abrogated. This division is necessary for "inspired volumes,"
which always abound in contradictions. But the charge of
"opportunism" brought against the Koran is truly absurd; as if
"revelation" could possibly be aught save opportune.

[FN#296] Koran iv. 160, the chapter "Women."

[FN#297] She unveiled, being a slave-girl and for sale. If a free
woman show her face to a Moslem, he breaks out into violent
abuse, because the act is intended to let him know that he is
looked upon as a small boy or an eunuch or a Chriastian--in fact
not a man.

[FN#298] Ilah=Heb. El, a most difficult root, meaning strength,
interposition, God (Numen) "the" (article) "don't" (do not), etc.
etc.

[FN#299] As far as I know Christians are the only worshippers who
kneel as if their lower legs were cut off and who "join hands"
like the captive offering his wrists to be bound (dare manus).
The posture, however, is not so ignoble as that of the Moslem
"Sijdah" (prostration) which made certain North African tribes
reject Al-Islam saying, "These men show their hind parts to
heaven."

[FN#300] i.e. saying "I intend (purpose) to pray (for instance)
the two-bow prayer (ruka'tayn) of the day-break," etc.

[FN#301] So called because it prohibits speaking with others till
the prayer is ended.

[FN#302] Lit. "any thing opposite;" here used for the Ka'abah
towards which men turn in prayer; as Guebres face the sun or fire
and idolators their images. "Al-Kiblatayn" (= the two Kiblahs)
means Meccah and Jerusalem, which was faced by Moslems as well as
Jews and Christians till Mohammed changed the direction. For the
occasion of the change see my Pilgrimage, ii. 320.

[FN#303] Which includes Tayammum or washing with sand. This is a
very cleanly practice in a hot, dry land and was adopted long
before Mohammed. Cedrenus tells of baptism with sand being
administered to a dying traveller in the African desert.

[FN#304] The Koranic order for Wuzú is concise and as usual
obscure, giving rise to a host of disputes and casuistical
questions. Its text runs (chapt. v.), "O true believers, when you
prepare to pray, wash (Ghusl) your faces, and your hands unto the
elbows; and rub (Mas-h) your hands and your feet unto the ankles;
and if ye be unclean by having lain with a woman, wash (Ghusl)
yourselves all over." The purifications and ceremonious ablutions
of the Jews originated this command; and the early Christians did
very unwisely in not making the bath obligatory. St. Paul (Heb.
xi. 22) says, "Let us draw near with a true heart...having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and our bodies washed
with clean (or pure) water." But this did not suffice. Hence the
Eastern Christian, in hot climates where cleanliness should rank
before godliness, is distinguished by his dirt which as a holy or
reverend man he makes still dirtier, and he offers an ugly
comparison with the Moslem and especially the Hindu. The neglect
of commands to wash and prohibitions to drink strong waters are
the two grand physical objections of the Christian code of
morality.

[FN#305] Arab. "Istinshák"=snuffing up water from the palm of the
right hand so as to clean thoroughly the nostrils. This
"function" is unreasonably neglected in Europe, to the detriment
of the mucous membrane and the olfactory nerves.

[FN#306] So as to wash between them. The thick beard is combed
out with the fingers.

[FN#307] Poor human nature! How sad to compare ita pretensions
with its actualities.

[FN#308] Complete ablution is rendered necessary chiefly by the
emission of semen either in copulation or in nocturnal pollution.
The water must be pure and not less than a certain quantity, and
it must touch every part of the skin beginning with the right
half of the person and ending with the left. Hence a plunge-bath
is generally preferred.

[FN#309] Arab. "Ta'mím," lit. crowning with turband, or tiara,
here=covering, i.e. wetting.

[FN#310] This practice (saying "I purpose to defer the washing of
the feet," etc.) is now somewhat obsolete.

[FN#311] Arabs have a prejudice against the hydropathic treatment
of wounds, holding that water poisons them: and, as the native
produce usually contains salt, soda and magnesia, they are
justified by many cases. I once tried water-bandages in Arabia
and failed dismally.

[FN#312] The sick man says his prayers lying in bed, etc., and as
he best can.

[FN#313] i.e. saying, "And peace be on us and on the worshippers
of Allah which be pious."

[FN#314] i.e. saying, " I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the
Stoned."

[FN#315] Certain parts should be recited aloud (jahr) and others
sotto voce (with mussitation=Khafi). No mistake must be made in
this matter where a Moslem cannot err.

[FN#316] Hence an interest of two-and-a-half percent is not held
to be "Ribá" or unlawful gain of money by money, usury.

[FN#317] The meal must be finished before the faster can plainly
distinguish the white thread from the black thread (Koran ii.
183); some understand this literally, others apply it to the dark
and silvery streak of zodiacal light which appears over the
Eastern horizon an hour or so before sunrise. The fast then
begins and ends with the disappearance of the sun. I have noticed
its pains and penalties in my Pilgrimage, i. 110, etc.

[FN#318] For the "Azán" or call to prayer see Lane, M. E., chapt.
xviii. The chant, however, differs in every country, and a
practical ear will know the land by its call.

[FN#319] Arab. "Hadís" or saying of the Apostle.

[FN#320] "Al-I'itikaf" resembles the Christian "retreat;" but the
worshipper generally retires to a mosque, especially in Meccah.
The Apostle practised it on Jabal Hira and other places.

[FN#321] The word is the Heb. "Hagg" whose primary meaning is
circularity of form or movement. Hence it applied to religious
festivals in which dancing round the idol played a prime part;
and Lucian of "saltation" says, dancing was from the beginning
and coeval with the ancient god, Love. But man danced with joy
before he worshipped, and, when he invented a systematic
saltation, he made it represent two things, and only two things,
love and war, in most primitive form, courtship and fighting.

[FN#322] Two adjoining ground-waves in Meccah. For these and for
the places subsequently mentioned the curious will consult my
Pilgrimage, iii. 226, etc.

[FN#323] The 'Umrah or lesser Pilgrimage, I have noted, is the
ceremony performed in Meccah at any time out of the
pilgrim-season proper, i.e. between the eighth and tenth days of
the twelfth lunar month Zu 'l-Hijjah. It does not entitle the
Moslem to be called Hájj (pilgrim) or Hájí as Persians and
Indians corrupt the word.

[FN#324] I need hardly note that Mohammed borrowed his
pilgrimage-practices from the pagan Arabs who, centuries before
his day, danced around the Meccan Ka'abah. Nor can he be blamed
for having perpetuated a Gentile rite, if indeed it be true that
the Ka'abah contained relics of Abraham and Ishmael.

[FN#325] On first sighting Meccah. See Night xci.

[FN#326] Arab. "Tawáf:" the place is called Matáf and the guide
Mutawwif. (Pilgrimage, iii. 193, 205.) The seven courses are
termed Ashwát.

[FN#327] Stoning the Devil at Mina. (Pilgrimage, iii. 282.) Hence
Satan's title "the Stoned" (lapidated not castrated).

[FN#328] Koran viii. 66; in the chapter entided "Spoil," and
relating mainly to the "day of Al-Bedr.

[FN#329] Arab. "AI-Ikálah"= cancelling: Mr. Payne uses the
technical term "resiliation."

[FN#330] Freedman of Abdallah, son of the Caliph Omar and noted
as a traditionist.

[FN#331] i.e. at a profit: the exchange must be equal--an
ordinance intended to protect the poor. Arabs have strange
prejudices in these matters; for instance it disgraces a Badawi
to take money for milk.

[FN#332] Arab. "Jamá'ah," which in theology means the Greek
        , our "Church," the congregation of the Faithful under a
lawful head. Hence the Sunnis call themselves "People of the
Sunnat and Jamá'at." In the text it is explained as "Ulfat" or
intimacy.

[FN#333] Arab. "Al-Khalíl," i.e. of Allah=Abraham. Mohammed,
following Jewish tradition, made Abraham rank second amongst the
Prophets, inferior only to himself and superior to Hazrat
Isa=Jesus. I have noted that Ishmael the elder son succeeded his
father. He married Da'alah bint Muzáz bin Omar, a Jurhamite, and
his progeny abandoning Hebrew began to speak Arabic (ta'arraba);
hence called Muta'arribah or Arabised Arabs. (Pilgrimage iii.
190.) He died at Meccah and was buried with his mother in the
space North of the Ka'abah called Al-Hijr which our writers
continue to confuse with the city Al-Hijr. (Ibid. 165-66.)

[FN#334] This ejaculation, "In the name of Allah" is, I have
noted, equivalent to "saying grace." If neglected it is a sin and
entails a curse.

[FN#335] The ceremonious posture is sitting upon the shin-bones,
not tailor-fashion; and "bolting food" is a sign of boorishness.

[FN#336] Arab. "Zidd," the word is a fair specimen of Arabic
ambiguity meaning primarily opposite or contrary (as virtue to
vice), secondarily an enemy or a friend (as being opposite to an
enemy).

[FN#337] "The whole earth (shall be) but His handful on the
Resurrection day and in His right hand shall the Heaven be rolled
up (or folded together)."-Koran xxxix. 67.

[FN#338] See Night lxxxi.

[FN#339] Koran lxxviii. 19.

[FN#340] Arab. "Al-Munáfik," technically meaning one who
outwardly professes Al-Islam while inwardly hating it. Thus the
word is by no means synonymous with our "hypocrite," hypocrisy
being the homage vice pays to virtue; a homage, I may observe,
nowhere rendered more fulsomely than among the so-called
Anglo-Saxon race.

[FN#341] Arab. "Tawakkul alá 'llah": in the imperative the phrase
is vulgarly used="Be off!"

[FN#342] i.e. ceremonial impurity which is sui generis, a very
different thing from general dirtiness.

[FN#343] A thick beard is one which does not show the skin;
otherwise the wearer is a "Kausaj;" in Pers. "Kúseh." See vol.
iii., 246.

[FN#344] Arab. "Al-Khutnah." Nowhere commanded in the Koran and
being only a practice of the Prophet, the rite is not
indispensable for converts, especially the aged and the sick. Our
ideas upon the subject are very hazy, for modern "niceness"
allows a "Feast of the Circumcision," but no discussion thereon.
Moses (alias Osarsiph) borrowed the rite from the Egyptian
hierophants who were all thus "purified"; the object being to
counteract the over-sensibility of the "sixth sense" and to
harden the glans against abrasions and infection by exposure to
air and friction against the dress. Almost all African tribes
practise it but the modes vary and some are exceedingly curious:
I shall notice a peculiarly barbarous fashion called Al-Salkh
(the flaying) still practised in the Arabian province Al-Asír.
(Pilgrimage iii. 80.) There is a difference too between the
Hebrew and the Moslem rite. The Jewish operator, after snipping
off the foreskin, rips up the prepuce with his sharp thumb-nails
so that the external cutis does not retract far from the
internal; and the wound, when healed, shows a narrow ring of
cicatrice. This ripping is not done by Moslems. They use a stick
as a probe passed round between glans and prepuce to ascertain
the extent of the frenum and that there is no abnormal adhesion.
The foreskin is then drawn forward and fixed by the forceps, a
fork of two bamboo splints, five or six inches long by a quarter
thick, or in some cases an iron like our compasses. This is tied
tightly over the foreskin so as to exclude about an inch and a
half of the prepuce above and three quarters below. A single
stroke of the razor drawn directly downwards removes the skin.
The slight bleeding is stopped by burnt rags or ashes and healed
with cerates, pledgets and fumigations. Thus Moslem circumcision
does not prevent the skin retracting.

[FN#345] Of these 6336 versets only some 200 treat on law, civil
and ceremonial, fiscal and political, devotional and ceremonial,
canonical and ecclesiastical.

[FN#346] The learned young woman omitted Ukhnúkh=Enoch, because
not in Koran; and if she denoted him by "Idrís," the latter is
much out of place.

[FN#347] Some say grandson of Shem. (Koran vii. 71.)

[FN#348] Koran vii. 63, etc.

[FN#349] Father-in-law of Moses. (Koran vii. 83.)

[FN#350] Who is the last and greatest of the twenty-five.

[FN#351] See Night ccccxxxviii.

[FN#352] Koran ii., whose 256th Ayah is the far-famed and sublime
Throne-verse which begins "Allah! there is no god but He, the
Living, the Eternal One, whom nor slumber nor sleep seizeth on!"
The trivial name is taken from the last line, "His throne
overstretcheth Heaven and Earth and to Him their preservation is
no burden for He is the most Highest, the Supreme." The lines are
often repeated in prayers and engraved on agates, etc., as
portable talismans.

[FN#353] Koran ii. 159.

[FN#354] Koran xvi. 92. The verset ends with, "He warneth you, so
haply ye may be mindful."

[FN#355] Koran lxx. 38.

[FN#356] Koran xxxix. 54.

[FN#357] The Sunnis hold that the "Anbiyá" (=prophets, or rather
announcers of Allah's judgments) were not sinless. But this dogma
is branded as most irreverent and sinful by the Shi'ahs or
Persian "followers of Ali," who make capital out of this
blasphemy and declare that if any prophet sinned he sinned only
against himself.

[FN#358] Koran xii. 18.

[FN#359] Koran ii. 107.

[FN#360] Koran ii. 57. He (Allah) does not use the plurale
majestatis.

[FN#361] Koran ii. 28.

[FN#362] Koran xvi. 100. Satan is stoned in the Miná or Muná
basin (Night ccccxlii.) because he tempted Abraham to disobey the
command of Allah by refusing to sacrifice Ishmael. (Pilgrimage
iii. 248.)

[FN#363] It may also mean "have recourse to God."

[FN#364] Abdallah ibn Abbas, before noticed, first cousin of
Mohammed and the most learned of the Companions. See D'Herbelot.

[FN#365] Koran xcvi., "Blood-clots," 1 and 2. "Read" may mean
"peruse the revelation" (it was the first Koranic chapter
communicated to Mohammed), or "recite, preach."

[FN#366] Koran xxvii. 30. Mr. Rodwell (p.1) holds to the old idea
that the "Basmalah" is of Jewish origin, taught to the Kuraysh by
Omayyah, of Taif, the poet and Haníf (convert).

[FN#367] Koran ix.: this was the last chapter revealed and the
only one revealed entire except verse 110.

[FN#368] Ali was despatched from Al-Medinah to Meccah by the
Prophet on his own slit-eared camel to promulgate this chapter;
and meeting the assembly at Al-'Akabah he also acquainted them
with four things; (1) No Infidel may approach the Meccah temple;
(2) naked men must no longer circut the Ka'abah; (3) only Moslems
enter Paradise, and (4) public faith must be kept.

[FN#369] Dictionaries give the word "Basmalah" (=saying
Bismillah); but the common pronunciation is "Bismalah."

[FN#370] Koran xvii. 110, a passage revealed because the
Infidels, hearing Mohammed calling upon The Compassionate,
imagined that Al-Rahmán was other deity but Allah. The "names"
have two grand divisions, Asmá Jalálí, the fiery or terrible
attributes, and the Asmá Jamálí (airy, watery, earthy or)
amiable. Together they form the Asmá al-Husna or glorious
attributes, and do not include the Ism al-A'azam, the ineffable
name which is known only to a few.

[FN#371] Koran ii. 158.

[FN#372] Koran xcvi. before noticed.

[FN#373] A man of Al-Medinah, one of the first of Mohammed's
disciples.

[FN#374] Koran lxxiv. 1, etc., supposed to have been addressed by
Gabriel to Mohammed when in the cave of Hira or Jabal Núr. He
returned to his wife Khadijah in sore terror at the vision of one
sitting on a throne between heaven and earth, and bade her cover
him up. Whereupon the Archangel descended with this text,
supposed to be the first revealed. Mr. Rodwell (p. 3) renders it,
"O thou enwrapped in thy mantle!" and makes it No. ii. after a
Fatrah or silent interval of six months to three years.

[FN#375] There are several versets on this subject (chapts. ii.
and xxx.)

[FN#376] Koran cx. 1.

[FN#377] The third Caliph; the "Writer of the Koran."

[FN#378] Koran, v. 4. Sale translates "idols." Mr. Rodwell, "On
the blocks (or shafts) of Stone," rude altars set by the pagan
Arabs before their dwellings.

[FN#379] Koran, v. 116. The words are put into the mouth of
Jesus.

[FN#380] The end of the same verse.

[FN#381] Koran, v. 89. Supposed to have been revealed when
certain Moslems purposed to practise Christian asceticism,
fasting, watching, abstaining from women and sleeping on hard
beds. I have said Mohammed would have "no monkery in Al-Islam,"
but human nature willed otherwise. Mr. Rodwell prefers "Interdict
the healthful viands."

[FN#382] Koran, iv. 124.

[FN#383] Arab. "Mukri." "Kári" is one who reads the Koran to
pupils; the Mukri corrects them. "With the passage of the clouds"
= without a moment's hesitation.

[FN#384] The twenty-first, twenty-fourth and eighteenth Arabic
letters.

[FN#385] Arab. "Hizb." The Koran is divided into sixty portions,
answering to "Lessons" for convenience of public worship.

[FN#386] Arab. "Jalálah,"=saying Jalla Jalálu-hu=magnified be His
Majesty!, or glorified be His Glory.

[FN#387] Koran, xi. 50.

[FN#388] The partition-wall between Heaven and Hell which others
call Al-'Urf (in the sing. from the verb meaning he separated or
parted). The Jews borrowed from the Guebres the idea of a
partition between Heaven and Hell and made it so thin that the
blessed and damned can speak together. There is much dispute
about the population of Al-A'aráf, the general idea being that
they are men who do not deserve reward in Heaven or punishment in
Hell. But it is not a "Purgatory" or place of expiating sins.

[FN#389] Koran, vii. 154.

[FN#390] A play on the word ayn, which means "eye" or the
eighteenth letter which in olden times had the form of a circle.

[FN#391] From misreading these words comes the absurd popular
belief of the moon passing up and down Mohammed's sleeves. George
B. Airy (The Athenæum, Nov.29, 1884) justly objects to Sale's
translation "The hour of judgment approacheth" and translates
"The moon hath been dichotomised" a well-known astronomical term
when the light portion of the moon is defined in a strait line:
in other words when it is really a half-moon at the first and
third quarters of each lunation. Others understand, The moon
shall be split on the Last Day, the preterite for the future in
prophetic style. "Koran Moslems" of course understand it
literally.

[FN#392] Chapters liv., lv. and lvi.

[FN#393] We should say, not to utter, etc.

[FN#394] These well-known "humours of Hippocrates," which
reappear in the form of temperaments of European phrenology, are
still the base of Eastern therapeutics.

[FN#395] The doctrine of the three souls will be intelligible to
Spiritualists.

[FN#396] Arab. "Al-lámi"=the l-shaped, curved, forked.

[FN#397] Arab. "Usus," our os sacrum because, being
incorruptible, the body will be built up thereon for
Resurrection-time. Hence Hudibras sings (iii. 2),

     "The learned Rabbis of the Jews
     Write there's a bone which they call leuz,
     I' the rump of man, etc."

It is the Heb. "Uz," whence older scholars derived os. Sale
(sect. iv.) called it "El Ajb, os coccygis or rump-bone."

[FN#398] Arab physiologists had difficulties in procuring
"subjects"; and usually practised dissection on the simiads.
Their illustrated books are droll; the figures have been copied
and recopied till they have lost all resemblance to the
originals.

[FN#399] The liver and spleen are held to be congealed blood.
Hence the couplet,

    "We are allowed two carrions (i.e. with throats uncut) and
         two bloods,
     The fish and the locust, the liver and the spleen."
(Pilgrimage iii. 92.)

[FN#400] This is perfectly true and yet little known to the
general.

[FN#401] Koran xvii. 39.

[FN#402] Arab. "Al-malikhulíya," proving that the Greeks then
pronounced the penultimate vowel according to the acute
accentía; not as we slur it over. In old Hebrew we have the
transliteration of four Greek words; in the languages of
Hindostan many scores including names of places; and in Latin and
Arabic as many hundreds. By a scholar-like comparison of these
remains we should find little difficulty in establishing the true
Greek pronunciation since the days of Alexander the Great; and we
shall prove that it was pronounced according to accent and
emphatically not quantity. In the next century I presume English
boys will be taught to pronounce Greek as the Greeks do.

[FN#403] Educated Arabs can quote many a verse bearing upon
domestic medicine and reminding us of the lines bequeathed to
Europe by the School of Salerno. Such e.g. are;

     "After the noon-meal, sleep, although for moments twain;
     After the night-meal, walk, though but two steps be ta'en;
     And after swiving stale, though but two drops thou drain."

[FN#404] Arab. "Sarídah" (Tharídah), also called "ghaut"=crumbled
bread and hashed meat in broth; or bread, milk and meat. The
Sarídah of Ghassán, cooked with eggs and marrow, was held a
dainty dish: hence the Prophet's dictum.

[FN#405] Koran v. 92. "Lots"=games of chance and
"images"=statues.

[FN#406] Koran ii. 216. The word "Maysar" which I have rendered
"gambling" or gaming (for such is the modern application of the
word), originally meant what St. Jerome calls            and
explains thereby the verse (Ezek. xxi. 22), "The King held in his
hand the lot of Jerusalem" i.e. the arrow whereon the city-name
was written. The Arabs use it for casting lots with ten azlam or
headless arrows (for dice) three being blanks and the rest
notched from one to seven. They were thrown by a "Zárib" or
punter and the stake was generally a camel. Amongst so excitable
a people as the Arabs, this game caused quarrels and bloodshed,
hence its prohibition: and the theologians, who everywhere and at
all times delight in burdening human nature, have extended the
command, which is rather admonitory than prohibitive, to all
games of chance. Tarafah is supposed to allude to this practice
in his Mu'allakah.

[FN#407] Liberal Moslems observe that the Koranic prohibition is
not absolute, with threat of Hell for infraction. Yet Mohammed
doubtless forbade all inebriatives and the occasion of his so
doing is well known. (Pilgrimage ii. 322.)

[FN#408] I have noticed this soured milk in Pilgrimage i. 362.

[FN#409] He does not say the "Caliph" or successor of his uncle
Mohammed.

[FN#410] The Jewish Korah (Numbers xvi.) fabled by the Koran
(xxviii. 76), following a Talmudic tradition, to have been a man
of immense wealth. The notion that lying with an old woman, after
the menses have ceased, is unwholesome, dates from great
antiquity; and the benefits of the reverse process were well
known to good King David. The faces of children who sleep with
their grandparents (a bad practice now waxing obsolete in
England), of a young wife married to an old man and of a young
man married to an old woman, show a peculiar wizened appearance,
a look of age overlaying youth which cannot be mistaken.

[FN#411] Arab. "Hindibá"(=endubium): the modern term is
Shakuríyah=chicorée. I believe it to be very hurtful to the eyes.

[FN#412] Arab. "Khuffásh" and "Watwát": in Egypt a woman is
called "Watwátíyah" when the hair of her privities has been
removed by applying bats' blood. I have often heard of this; but
cannot understand how such an application can act depilatory.

[FN#413] Dictionaries render the word by "dragon, cockatrice."
The Badawin apply it to a variety of serpents mostly large and
all considered venomous.

[FN#414] Arab. "Zarr wa 'urwah," 1it.=handle. The button-hole, I
have said, is a modern invention; Urwah is also applied to the
loopshaped handle of the water-skin, for attachment of the
Allákah or suspensory thong.

[FN#415] Koran lxx. 40; see also the chapter following, v. 16.

[FN#416] Koran x. 5; the "her" refers to the sun.

[FN#417] Koran xxxvi. 40.

[FN#418] Koran xxii. 60.

[FN#419] Arab. "Manázil:" these are the Hindu "Nakshatra";
extensively used in meteorology even by Europeans unconsciously:
thus they will speak of the Elephantina-storm without knowing
anything of the lunar mansion so called. The names in the text
are successively Sharatán=two horns of the Ram; (2) the Ram's
belly; (3) the Pleiades; (4) Aldebaran; (5) three stars in
Orion's head; (6) ditto in Orion's shoulder; (7) two stars above
the Twins; (8) Lion's nose and first summer station; (9) Lion's
eye; (1O) Lion's forehead; (11) Lion's mane; (12) Lion's heart;
(13) the Dog, two stars in Virgo; (14) Spica Virginis; (15) foot
of Virgo; (16) horns of Scorpio; (17) the Crown; (18) heart of
Scorpio; (19) tail of Scorpio; (2O) stars in Pegasus; (21) where
no constellation appears; (22) the Slaughterer's luck; (23)
Glutton's luck; (24) Luck of Lucks, stars in Aquarius; (25) Luck
of Tents, stars in Aquarius; (26) the fore-lip or spout of Urn;
(27) hind lip of Urn; and (28) in navel of Fish's belly (Batn
al-Hút); of these 28, to each of the four seasons 7 are allotted.

[FN#420] The Hebrew absey, still used by Moslems in chronograms.
For mnemonic purposes the 28 letters are distributed into eight
words of which the first and second are Abjad and Hawwaz. The
last six letters in two words (Thakhiz and Zuzigh) are Arabian,
unknown to the Jews and not found in Syriac.

[FN#421] Arab. "Zindík;" properly, one who believes in two gods
(the old Persian dualism); in books an atheist, i.e. one who does
not believe in a god or gods; and, popularly, a free-thinker who
denies the existence of a Supreme Being, rejects revelation for
the laws of Nature imprinted on the heart of man and for humanity
in its widest sense. Hence he is accused of permitting incestuous
marriages and other abominations. We should now call him (for
want of something better) an Agnostic.

[FN#422] Koran xxxi. 34. The words may still be applied to
meteorologists especially of the scientific school. Even the
experienced (as the followers of the late Mathieu de la Drôme)
reckon far more failures than successes. The Koranic passage
enumerates five things known only to Allah; Judgment-day; rain;
sex of child in womb; what shall happen to-morrow and where a man
shall die.

[FN#423] The fifth and seventh months (January and March) of the
Coptic year which, being solar, is still used by Arab and
Egyptian meteorologists. Much information thereon will be found
in the "Egyptian Calendar" by Mr. Mitchell, Alexandria, 1876. It
bears the appropriate motto "Anni certus modus apud solos semper
Egyptios fuit." (Macrobius.) See also Lane M.E., chapt. ix.

[FN#424] Vulg. Kiyák; the fourth month, beginning 9th--1Oth
December. The first month is Tút, commencing 1Oth--11th
September.

[FN#425] The 8th and 12th months partly corresponding with April
and August: Hátúr is the 3rd (November) and AmshRr the 6th
(February).

[FN#426] Moslems have been compelled to adopt infidel names for
the months because Mohammed's Koranic rejection of Nasy or
intercalation makes their lunar months describe the whole circle
of the seasons in a cycle of about thirty-three and a half years.
Yet they have retained the terms which contain the original
motive of the denomination. The first month is Muharram, the
"Holy," because war was forbidden; it was also known as Safar No.
1. The second Safar="Emptiness," because during the heats
citizens left the towns and retired to Táif and other cool sites.
Rabí'a (first and second) alluded to the spring-pasturages;
Jumádá (first and second) to the "hardening" of the dry ground
and, according to some, to the solidification, freezing, of the
water in the highlands. Rajab (No.7)="worshipping," especially by
sacrifice, is also known as Al-Asamm the deaf; because being
sacred, the rattle of arms was unheard. Sha'abán="collecting,"
dispersing, ruining, because the tribal wars recommenced: Ramazan
(intensely hot) has been explained and Shawwál (No. 10) derives
from Shaul (elevating) when the he-camels raise their tails in
rut. Zú'l-Ka'adah, the sedentary, is the rest time of the year,
when fighting is forbidden and Zu'l-Hijjah explains itself as the
pilgrimage-month.

[FN#427] The lowest of the seven.

[FN#428] Koran xxxvii. 5.

[FN#429] Arab. "Faylasúf," an evident corruption from the Greek.
Amongst the vulgar it denotes a sceptic, an atheist; much the
same a "Frammásún" or Freemason. The curious reader will consult
the Dabistan, vol. iii. chapt. xi. p. 138 et seq. "On the
Religion of the Wise" (philosophi), and, Beaconsfield's theft
from Shaftesbury.

[FN#430] Koran xxxvi. 37-38.

[FN#431] Koran xxii. 7. The Hour i.e. of Judgment.

[FN#432] Koran xx. 58. The Midrasch Tanchumah on Exod. vii. gives
a similar dialogue between Pharaoh and Moses. (Rodwell, in loco.)

[FN#433] Arab. "Sham'ún" or "Shim'ún," usually applied to Simon
Peter (as in Acts xv. 14). But the text alludes to Saint Simeon
(Luke ii. 25-35). See Gospel of Infancy (ii. 8) and especially
the Gospel of Nicodemus (xii. 3) which makes him a High-Priest.

[FN#434] Sálih the Patriarch's she-camel, miraculously produced
from the rock in order to convert the Thamúd-tribe. (Koran vii.)

[FN#435] When Abu Bakr was hiding with Mohammed in a cave on the
Hill Al-Saur (Thaur or Thúr, Pilgrimage ii. 131) South of Meccah,
which must not be confounded with the cave on Jabal Hirá now
called Jabal Núr on the way to Arafat (Pilgrimage iii. 246), the
fugitives were protected by a bird which built her nest at the
entrance (according to another legend it was curtained by a
spider's web), whilst another bird (the crow of whom I shall
presently speak) tried to betray them. The first bird is
popularly supposed to have been a pigeon, and is referred to by
Hudibras,

     "Th' apostles of this fierce religion
     Like Mahomet, were ass and widgeon."

The ass I presume alludes to the marvellous beast Al-Burák which
the Greeks called         from      (Euthymius in Pocock, Spec.
A.H. p.144) and which Indian Moslems picture with human face,
ass's ears, equine body and peacock's wings and tail. The
"widgeon" I presume to be a mistake or a misprint for pigeon.

[FN#436] The Arabs are not satisfied with the comparative
moderation of the Hebrew miracle, and have added all manner of
absurdities. (Pilgrimage ii. 288.)

[FN#437] Koran lxxxi. 18. Sale translates "by the morning when it
appeareth;" and the word (tanaffus) will bear this meaning. Mr.
Rodwell prefers, "By the dawn when it clears away the darkness by
its breath."

[FN#438] As a rule Moslems are absurdly ignorant of arithmetic
and apparently cannot master it. Hence in Egypt they used Copts
for calculating-machines and further East Hindds. The mildest
numerical puzzle, like the above, is sure of success.

[FN#439] The paradiseal tree which supplied every want. Mohammed
borrowed it from the Christians (Rev. xxi. 10-21 and xxii. 1-2)
who placed in their paradise the Tree of Life which bears twelve
sorts of fruits and leaves of healing virtue. (See also the 3rd
book of Hermas, his Similitudes.) The Hebrews borrowed it from
the Persians. Amongst the Hindus it appears as "Kalpavriksha;"
amongst the Scandinavians as Yggdrasil. The curious reader will
consult Mr. James Fergusson's learned work, "Tree and Serpent
Worship," etc. London, 1873.

[FN#440] Aaron's Rod becomes amongst Moslems (Koran vii. 110)
Moses' Staff; the size being that of a top-mast. (Pilgrimage i.
300, 301.) In Koran xx. 18, 19, we find a notice of its uses; and
during the Middle Ages it reappeared in the Staff of Wamba the
Goth (A.D.672-680) the witch's broomstick was its latest
development.

[FN#441] Christ, say the Eutychians, had only one nature, the
divine; so he was crucified in effigy.

[FN#442] Jesus is compared with Adam in the Koran (chapt. iii.):
his titles are Kalámu 'llah (word of God) because engendered
without a father, and Rúhu 'llah (breath of God) because
conceived by Gabriel in the shape of a beautifui youth breathing
into the Virgin's vulva. Hence Moslems believe in a "miraculous
conception" and consequently determine that one so conceived was,
like Elias and Khizr, not subject to death; they also hold him
born free from "original sin" (a most sinful superstition), a
veil being placed before the Virgin and Child against the Evil
One who could not touch them. He spoke when a babe in cradle; he
performed miracles of physic; he was taken up to Heaven; he will
appear as the forerunner of Mohammed on the White Tower of
Damascus, and finally he will be buried at Al-Medinah. The Jews
on the other hand speak of him as "that man:" they hold that he
was begotten by Joseph during the menstrual period and therefore
a born magician. Moreover he learned the Sham ha-maphrash or
Nomen tetragrammaton, wrote it on parchment and placed it in an
incision in his thigh, which closed up on the Name being
mentioned (Buxtorf, Lex Talmud, 25-41). Other details are given
in the Toldoth Jesu (Historia Joshuæ Nazareni). This note should
be read by the eminent English littérateur who discovered a fact,
well known to Locke and Carlyle, that "Mohammedans are
Christians." So they are and something more.

[FN#443] In the Kalamdán, or pen-case, is a little inkstand of
metal occupying the top of the long, narrow box.

[FN#444] A fair specimen of the riddle known as the "surprise."

[FN#445] Koran xli. 10.

[FN#446] Koran xxxvi. 82.

[FN#447] Here we enter upon a series of disputed points. The
Wahhábis deny the intercession of the Apostle (Pilgrimage ii.
76-77). The Shi'ahs place Ali next in dignity to Mohammed and
there is a sect (Ali-Iláhi) which believes him to be an Avatar or
incarnation of the Deity. For the latter the curious reader will
consult the "Dabistan," ii. 451. The Koran by its many
contradictions seems to show that Mohammed never could make up
his own mind on the subject, thinking himself at times an
intercessor and then sharply denying all intercession.

[FN#448] Arab. "Kanjifah"=a pack of cards; corrupted from the
Persian "Ganjífah." We know little concerning the date or origin
of this game in the East, where the packs are quite unlike ours.

[FN#449] It is interesting to compare this account with the
pseudo Ovid and with Tale clxvi. in Gesta "Of the game of
Schaci." Its Schacarium is the chess-board. Rochus (roccus, etc.)
is not from the Germ. Rock (a coat) but from Rukh (Pers. a hero,
a knight-errant) Alphinus (Ital. Alfino) is Al-Firzán (Pers.
science, wise).

[FN#450] Arab, "Baydak" or "Bayzak"; a corruption of the Persian
"Piyádah"=a footman, peon, pawn; and proving whence the Arabs
derived the game. The Persians are the readiest
backgammon-players known to me, better even than the Greeks; they
throw the dice from the hand and continue foully abusing the
fathers and mothers of the "bones" whilst the game lasts. It is
often played in the intervals of dinner by the higher classes in
Persia.

[FN#451] Metaphor from loading camels and mules. To "eat" a piece
is to take it.

[FN#452] Arab. "Bilábil"; a plural of "Bulbul" with a double
entendre balábil (plur. of ballalah)=heart's troubles, and "balá,
bul"=a calamity, nay, etc. 

[FN#453] The popular English idea of the Arab horse is founded
upon utter unfact. Book after book tells us, "There are three
distinct breeds of Arabians -the Attechi, a very superior breed;
the Kadishi, mixed with these and of little value; and the
Kochlani, highly prized and very difficult to procure." "Attechi"
may be At-Tázi (the Arab horse, or hound) or some confusion with
"At" (Turk.) a horse. "Kadish" (Gadish or Kidish) is a nag; a
gelding, a hackney, a "pacer" (generally called "Rahwán").
"Kochlani" is evidently "Kohláni," the Kohl-eyed, because the
skin round the orbits is dark as if powdered. This is the true
blue blood; and the bluest of all is "Kohláni al-Ajúz" (of the
old woman) a name thus accounted for. An Arab mare dropped a
filly when in flight; her rider perforce galloped on and
presently saw the foal appear in camp, when it was given to an
old woman for nursing and grew up to be famous. The home of the
Arab horse is the vast plateau of Al-Najd: the Tahámah or lower
maritime regions of Arabia, like Malabar, will not breed good
beasts. The pure blood all descends from five collateral lines
called Al-Khamsah (the Cinque). Literary and pedantic Arabs
derive them from the mares of Mohammed, a native of the dry and
rocky region, Al-Hijaz, whither horses are all imported. Others
go back (with the Koran, chapt. xxviii.) to Solomon, possibly
Salmán, a patriarch fourth in descent from Ishmael and some 600
years older than the Hebrew King. The Badawi derive the five from
Rabí'at al-Faras (R. of the mare) fourth in descent from Adnán,
the fount of Arab genealogy. But they differ about the names:
those generally given are Kahilan (Kohaylat), Sakláwi (which the
Badawin pronounce Sagláwi), Abayán, and Hamdáni; others
substitute Manákhi (the long-maned), Tanís and Jalfún. These
require no certificate amongst Arabs; for strangers a simple
statement is considered enough. The Badawin despise all
half-breeds (Arab sires and country mares), Syrian, Turkish,
Kurdish and Egyptian. They call these (first mentioned in the
reign of Ahmes, B.C. 1600) the "sons of horses"; as opposed to
"sons of mares," or thorough-breds. Nor do they believe in
city-bred animals. I have great doubts concerning our old English
sires, such as the Darley Arabian which looks like a Kurdish
half-bred, the descendant of those Cappadocians so much prized by
the Romans: in Syria I rode a "Harfúshí" (Kurd) the very image of
it. There is no difficulty in buying Arab stallions except the
price. Of course the tribe does not like to part with what may
benefit the members generally; but offers of £500 to £1,000 would
overcome men's scruples. It is different with mares, which are
almost always the joint property of several owners. The people
too dislike to see a hat on a thorough-bred mare: "What hast thou
done that thou art ridden by that ill-omened Kafir?" the Badawin
used to mutter when they saw a highly respectable missionary at
Damascus mounting a fine Ruwalá mare. The feeling easily explains
the many wars about horses occurring in Arab annals, e.g. about
Dáhis and Ghabrá. (C. de Perceval, Essas, vol.ii.)

[FN#454] The stricter kind of Eastern Jew prefers to die on the
floor, not in bed, as was the case with the late Mr. Emmanuel
Deutsch, who in his well-known article on the Talmud had the
courage to speak of "Our Saviour." But as a rule the Israelite,
though he mostly appears as a Deist, a Unitarian, has a fund of
fanatical feelings which crop up in old age and near death. The
"converts" in Syria and elsewhere, whose Judaism is intensified
by "conversion," when offers are made to them by the missionaries
repair to the Khákhám (scribe) and, after abundant wrangling
determine upon a modus vivendi. They are to pay a proportion of
their wages, to keep careful watch in the cause of Israel and to
die orthodox. In Istria there is a legend of a Jew Prior in a
convent who was not discovered till he announced himself most
unpleasantly on his death-bed. For a contrary reason to Jewish
humility, the Roman Emperors preferred to die standing.

[FN#455] He wished to die in a state of ceremonial purity; as has
before been mentioned.

[FN#456] Arab. "Badal": in Sind (not to speak of other places) it
was customary to hire a pauper "badal" to be hanged in stead of a
rich man. Sir Charles Napier signed many a death-warrant before
he ever heard of the practice.

[FN#457] Arab. "La'an" = curse. The word is in every mouth though
strongly forbidden by religion. Even of the enemies of Al-Islam
the learned say, "Ila'an Yezíd wa lá tazíd" = curse Yezid but do
not exceed (i.e. refrain from cursing the others). This, however,
is in the Shafi'í school and the Hanafís do not allow it
(Pilgrimage i. 198). Hence the Moslem when scrupulous uses na'al
(shoe) for la'an (curse) as Ina'al abúk (for Ila'an abu'-k) or,
drat (instead of damn) your father. Men must hold Supreme
Intelligence to be of feeble kind if put off by such miserable
pretences.

[FN#458] Koran vi. 44, speaking of the Infidels. It is a most
unamiable chapter, with such assertions as "Allah leadeth into
error whom He pleaseth," etc.

[FN#459] Alluding to the "formication" which accompanies a stroke
of paralysis.

[FN#460] Pronounce Zool Karnayn.

[FN#461] i.e. the Koranic and our mediæval Alexander, Lord of the
two Horns (East and West) much "Matagrobolized" and very
different from him of Macedon. The title is variously explained,
from two protuberances on his head or helm, from two long locks
and, possibly, from the ram-horns of Jupiter Ammon. The anecdote
in the text seems suggested by the famous interview (probably a
canard) with Diogenes: see in the Gesta, Tale cxlvi., "The answer
of Diomedes the Pirate to Alexander." Iskandar was originally
called Marzbán (Lord of the Marches), son of Marzabah; and,
though descended from Yunán, son of Japhet, the eponymus of the
Greeks, was born obscure, the son of an old woman. According to
the Persians he was the son of the Elder Dáráb (Darius Codomannus
of the Kayanian or Second dynasty), by a daughter of Philip of
Macedon; and was brought up by his grandfather. When Abraham and
Isaac had rebuilt the Ka'abah they foregathered with him and
Allah sent him forth against the four quarters of the earth to
convert men to the faith of the Friend or to cut their throats;
thus he became one of the four world-conquerors with Nimrod,
Solomon, Bukht al-Nasr (Nabochodonosor); and he lived down two
generations of men. His Wazir was Aristú (the Greek Aristotle)
and he carried a couple of flags, white and black, which made day
and night for h