di," the "Herodotus of the Arabs," thus notices
Sindibad the Sage (in his Muruj, etc., written about A.D. 934).
"During the reign of Kurush (Cyrus) lived Al-Sindibad who wrote
the Seven Wazirs, etc." Al-Ya'akubi had also named him, circ.
A.D. 880. For notes on the name Sindibad, see Sindbad the Seaman,
Night dxxxvi. I need not enter into the history of the "Seven
Sages," a book evidently older than The Nights in present form;
but refer the reader to Mr. Clouston, of whom more in a future
page.

[FN#156] Evidently borrowed from the Christians, although the
latter borrowed from writers of the most remote antiquity. Yet
the saying is the basis of all morality and in few words contains
the highest human wisdom.

[FN#157] It is curious to compare the dry and business-like tone
of the Arab style with the rhetorical luxuriance of the Persian:
p.10 of Mr. Clouston's "Book of Sindibad."

[FN#158] In the text "Isfidaj," the Pers. Isped (or Safed) ab,
lit. = white water, ceruse used for women's faces suggesting our
"Age of Bismuth," Blanc Rosati, Creme de l'Imperatrice, Perline,
Opaline, Milk of Beauty, etc., etc.

[FN#159] Commentators compare this incident with the biblical
story of Joseph and Potiphar's wife and with the old Egyptian
romance and fairy tale of the brothers Anapon and Saton dating
from the fourteenth century, the days of Pharaoh Ramses Miamun
(who built Pi-tum and Ramses) at whose court Moses or Osarsiph is
supposed to have been reared (Cambridge Essays 1858). The
incident would often occur, e.g. Phaedra-cum-Hippolytus;
Fausta-cum-Crispus and Lucinian; Asoka's wife and Kunala, etc.,
etc. Such things happen in every-day life, and the situation has
recommended itself to the folk lore of all peoples.

[FN#160] Another version of this tale is given in the Bresl.
Edit. (vol. viii. pp. 273-8: Night 675-6). It is the "Story of
the King and the Virtuous Wife" in the Book of Sindibad. In the
versions Arabic and Greek (Syntipas) the King forgets his ring;
in the Hebrew Mishle Sandabar, his staff, and his sandals in the
old Spanish Libro de los Engannos et los Asayamientos de las
Mugeres.

[FN#161] One might fancy that this is Biblical, Bathsheba and
Uriah. But such "villanies" must often have occurred in the East,
at different times and places, without requiring direct
derivation. The learned Prof. H. H. Wilson was mistaken in
supposing that these fictions "originate in the feeling which has
always pervaded the East unfavourable to the dignity of women."
They belong to a certain stage of civilisation when the sexes are
at war with each other; and they characterise chivalrous Europe
as well as misogynous Asia; witness Jankins, clerk of Oxenforde;
while AEsop's fable of the Lion and the Man also explains their
frequency.

[FN#162] The European form of the tale is "Toujours perdrix," a
sentence often quoted but seldom understood. It is the reproach
of M. l'Abbe when the Count (proprietor of the pretty Countess)
made him eat partridge every day for a month; on which the Abbe
says, "Alway partridge is too much of a good thing!" Upon this
text the Count speaks. A correspondent mentions that it was told
by Horace Walpole concerning the Confessor of a French King who
reproved him for conjugal infidelities. The degraded French (for
"toujours de la perdrix" or "des perdrix") suggests a foreign
origin. Another friend refers me to No. x. of the "Cent Nouvelles
Nouvelles" (compiled in A.D. 1432 for the amusement of the
Dauphin, afterwards Louis XI.) whose chief personage "un grand
seigneur du Royaulme d'Angleterre," is lectured upon fidelity by
the lord's mignon, a "jeune et gracieux gentil homme de son
hostel." Here the partridge became pastes d'anguille. Possibly
Scott refers to it in Redgauntlet (chapt. iv.); "One must be very
fond of partridge to accept it when thrown in one's face." Did
not Voltaire complain at Potsdam of "toujours perdrix" and make
it one of his grievances? A similar story is that of the chaplain
who, weary of the same diet, uttered "grace" as follows:--

          Rabbits hot, rabbits cold,
             Rabbits tender, and rabbits tough,
          Rabbits young, and rabbits old 
             I thank the Lord I've had enough.

And I as cordially thank my kind correspondents.

[FN#163] The great legal authority of the realm.

[FN#164] In all editions the Wazir here tells the Tale of the
Merchant's Wife and the Parrot which, following Lane, I have
transferred to vol. i. p. 52. But not to break the tradition I
here introduce the Persian version of the story from the "Book of
Sindibad." In addition to the details given in the note to vol.
i., 52 {Vol1, FN#90}; I may quote the two talking-birds left to
watch over his young wife by Rajah Rasalu (son of Shalivahana the
great Indian monarch circ. A.D. 81), who is to the Punjab what
Rustam is to Persia and Antar to Arabia. In the "Seven Wise
Masters" the parrot becomes a magpie and Mr. Clouston, in some
clever papers on "Popular Tales and Fictions" contributed to the
Glasgow Evening Times (1884), compares it with the history, in
the Gesta Romanorum, of the Adulteress, the Abigail, and the
Three Cocks, two of which crowed during the congress of the lady
and her lover. All these evidently belong to the Sindibad cycle.

[FN#165] In the days of the Caliph Al-Mustakfi bi 'llah (A.H.
333=944) the youth of Baghdad studied swimming and it is said
that they could swim holding chafing-dishes upon which were
cooking-pots and keep afloat till the meat was dressed. The story
is that of "The Washerman and his Son who were drowned in the
Nile," of the Book of Sindibad.

[FN#166] Her going to the bath suggested that she was fresh from
coition..

[FN#167] Taken from the life of the Egyptian Mameluke Sultan (No.
viii, regn. A.H, 825= A.D. 1421) who would not suffer his
subjects to prostrate themselves or kiss the ground before him.
See D'Herbelot for details.

[FN#168] This nauseous Joe Miller has often been told in the
hospitals of London and Paris. It is as old as the Hitopadesa.

[FN#169] Koran iv. 81, "All is from Allah;" but the evil which
befals mankind, though ordered by Allah, is yet the consequence
of their own wickedness (I add, which wickedness was created by
Allah).

[FN#170] The Bresl. Edit. (xii. 266) says "bathing."

[FN#171] This tale is much like that told in the Fifth Night
(vol. i. 54). It is the story of the Prince and the Lamia in the
Book of Sindibad wherein it is given with Persian rhetoric and
diffuseness.

[FN#172] Arab. "Wa'ar"= rocky, hilly, tree-less ground unfit for
riding. I have noted that the three Heb. words "Year" (e.g.
Kiryath-Yearin=City of forest), "Choresh" (now Hirsh, a scrub),
and "Pardes" ({Greek letters} a chase, a hunting-park opposed to
     , an orchard) are preserved in Arabic and are intelligible
in Palestine. (Unexplored Syria, i. 207.)

[FN#173] The privy and the bath are favourite haunts of the
Jinns.

[FN#174] Arab history is full of petty wars caused by trifles. In
Egypt the clans Sa'ad and Haram and in Syria the Kays and Yaman
(which remain to the present day) were as pugnacious as Highland
Caterans. The tale bears some likeness to the accumulative
nursery rhymes in "The House that Jack Built," and "The Old Woman
and the Crooked Sixpence;" which find their indirect original in
an allegorical Talmudic hymn.

[FN#175] This is "The Story of the Old Man who sent his Young
Wife to the Market to buy Rice," told with Persian reflections in
the "Book of Sindibad."

[FN#176] Koran xii. 28. The words were spoken by Potiphar to
Joseph.

[FN#177] Koran iv. 78. A mis-quotation, the words are, "Fight
therefore against the friends of Satan, for the craft of Satan
shall be weak."

[FN#178] i.e. Koranic versets.

[FN#179] In the Book of Sindibad this is the "Story of the Prince
who went out to hunt and the stratagem which the Wazir practised
on him."

[FN#180] I have noted that it is a dire affront to an Arab if his
first cousin marry any save himself without his formal leave.

[FN#181] i.e. the flowery, the splendid; an epithet of Fatimah,
the daughter of the Apostle "the bright blooming." Fatimah is an
old Arab name of good omen, "the weaner:" in Egypt it becomes
Fattumah (an incrementative= "great weaner"); and so Aminah,
Khadijah and Nafisah on the banks of the Nile are barbarised to
Ammunah, Khaddugah and Naffusah.

[FN#182] i.e. his coming misfortune, the phrase being
euphemistic.

[FN#183] Arab. "Ray:" in theology it means "private judgment" and
"Rayi" (act. partic.) is a Rationalist. The Hanafi School is
called "Ashab al-Ray" because it allows more liberty of thought
than the other three orthodox.

[FN#184] The angels in Al-Islam ride piebalds.

[FN#185] In the Bresl. Edit. "Zajir" (xii. 286).

[FN#186] This is the "King's Son and the Merchant's Wife" of the
Hitopadesa (chapt. i.) transferred to all the Prakrit versions of
India. It is the Story of the Bath-keeper who conducted his Wife
to the Son of the King of Kanuj in the Book of Sindibad.

[FN#187] The pious Caliph Al-Muktadi bi Amri 'llah (A.H. 467=A.D.
1075) was obliged to forbid men entering the baths of Baghdad
without drawers.

[FN#188] This peculiarity is not uncommon amongst the so-called
Aryan and Semitic races, while to the African it is all but
unknown. Women highly prize a conformation which (as the
prostitute described it) is always "either in his belly or in
mine."

[FN#189] Easterns, I have said, are perfectly aware of the fact
that women corrupt women much more than men do. The tale is the
"Story of the Libertine Husband" in the Book of Sindibad; blended
with the "Story of the Go-between and the Bitch" in the Book of
Sindibad. It is related in the "Disciplina Clericalis" of
Alphonsus (A.D. 1106); the fabliau of La vieille qui seduisit la
jeune fille; the Gesta Romanorum (thirteenth century) and the
"Cunning Siddhikari" in the Katha-Sarit-Sagara.

[FN#190] The Kashmir people, men and women, have a very bad name
in Eastern tales, the former for treachery and the latter for
unchastity. A Persian distich says:

  If folk be scarce as food in dearth ne'er let three lots come
near ye:
  First Sindi, second Jat, and third a rascally Kashmeeree.

The women have fair skins and handsome features but, like all
living in that zone, Persians, Sindis, Afghans, etc., their
bosoms fall after the first child and become like udders. This is
not the case with Hindu women, Rajputs, Marathis, etc.

[FN#191] By these words she appealed to his honour.

[FN#192] These vehicles suggest derivation from European
witchery. In the Bresl. Edit. (xii. 304) one of the women rides a
"Miknasah" or broom.

[FN#193] i.e. a recluse who avoids society.

[FN#194] "Consecrated ground" is happily unknown to Moslems.
     
[FN#195] This incident occurs in the "Third Kalandar's Tale." See
vol. i. 157 {Vol 1, FN#290}; and note to p. 145. {Vol 1, FN#264}

[FN#196] The Mac. Edit. has "Nahr"= river.

[FN#197] i.e. marked with the Wasm or tribal sign to show their
blood. The subject of Wasm is extensive and highly interesting,
for many of these brands date doubtless from prehistoric ages.
For instance, some of the great Anazah nation (not tribe) use a
circlet, the initial of their name (an Ayn-letter), which thus
shows the eye from which it was formed. I have given some
specimens of Wasm in The Land of Midian (i. 320) where, as
amongst the "Sinaitic" Badawin, various kinds of crosses are
preserved long after the death and burial of Christianity.

[FN#198] i.e. from the heights. The "Sayl" is a dangerous feature
in Arabia as in Southern India, where many officers have lost
their lives by trying to swim it.

[FN#199] Arab. "'Ujb" I use arrogance in the Spanish sense of
"arrogante," gay and gallant.

[FN#200] In this rechauffe Paul Pry escapes without losing an
eye.

[FN#201] Eastern tale-tellers always harp upon this theme, the
cunning precautions taken by mankind and their utter confusion by
"Fate and Fortune." In such matters the West remarks, "Ce que
femme veut, Dieu veut."

[FN#202] As favourite an occupation in Oriental lands as in
Southern Europe and the Brazil, where the Quinta or country villa
must be built by the road-side to please the mistress.

[FN#203] The ink-case would contain the pens; hence called in
India Kalamdan=reed (pen) box. I have advised travellers to
prefer the strong Egyptian article of brass to the Persian, which
is of wood or papier-mache, prettily varnished, but not to wear
it in the waist-belt, as this is a sign of being a scribe.
(Pilgrimage i. 353.)

[FN#204] The vulgar Eastern idea is that women are quite knowing
enough without learning to read and write; and at all events they
should not be taught anything beyond reading the Koran, or some
clearly-written book. The contrast with modern Europe is great;
greater still in Anglo-America of our day, and greatest with the
new sects which propose "biunes" and "bisexuals" and "women robed
with the sun."

[FN#205] In the Bresl. Edit. the Prince ties a key to a second
arrow and shoots it into the pavilion.

[FN#206] The "box-trick" has often been played with success, by
Lord Byron amongst a host of others. The readiness with which the
Wazir enters into the scheme is characteristic of oriental
servility: an honest Moslem should at least put in a
remonstrance.

[FN#207] This story appears familiar, but I have not found it
easy to trace. In "The Book of Sindibad" (p. 83) it is apparently
represented by a lacuna. In the Squire's Tale of Chaucer Canace's
ring enables the wearer to understand bird-language, not merely
to pretend as does the slave-boy in the text.

[FN#208] The crow is an ill-omened bird in Al-lslam and in
Eastern Christendom. "The crow of cursed life and foul odour,"
says the Book of Kalilah and Dimna (p. 44). The Hindus are its
only protectors, and in this matter they follow suit with the
Guebres. I may note that the word belongs to the days before
"Aryan" and "Semitic" speech had parted; we find it in Heb. Oreb;
Arab. Ghurab; Lat. Corvus; Engl. Crow, etc.

[FN#209] Again in the Hibernian sense of being "kilt."

[FN#210] Quoted in Night dlxxxii.; said by Kitfir or Itfir
(Potiphar) when his wife (Rail or Zulaykha) charged Joseph with
attempting her chastity and he saw that the youth's garment was
whole in front and rent in rear. (Koran, chapt. xii.)

[FN#211] This witty tale, ending somewhat grossly here, has
over-wandered the world. First we find it in the Katha (S. S.)
where Upakosha, the merry wife of Vararuchi, disrobes her
suitors, a family priest, a commander of the guard and the
prince's tutor, under plea of the bath and stows them away in
baskets which suggest Falstaff's "buck-basket." In Miss Stokes'
"Indian Fairy Tales" the fair wife of an absent merchant plays a
similar notable prank upon the Kotwal, the Wazir, the Kazi and
the King; and akin to this is the exploit of Temal Ramakistnan,
the Madrasi Tyl Eulenspiegel and Scogin who by means of a lady
saves his life from the Rajah and the High Priest. Mr. G. H.
Damant (pp. 357-360 of the "Indian Antiquary" of 1873) relates
the "Tale of the Touchstone," a legend of Dinahpur, wherein a
woman "sells" her four admirers. In the Persian Tales ascribed to
the Dervish "Mokles" (Mukhlis) of Isfahan, the lady Aruya tricks
and exposes a Kazi, a doctor and a governor. Boccaccio (viii. 1)
has the story of a lady who shut up her gallant in a chest with
her husband's sanction; and a similar tale (ix. 1) of Rinuccio
and Alexander with the corpse of Scannadeo (Throkh-god). Hence a
Lydgate (circ. A.D. 1430) derived the plot of his metrical tale
of "The Lady Prioress and her Three Sisters"; which was modified
in the Netherlandish version by the introduction of the Long
Wapper, a Flemish Robin Goodfellow. Followed in English the
metrical tale of "The Wright's Chaste Wife," by Adam of Cobham
(edited by Mr. Furnivall from a MS. of circ. A.D. 1460) where the
victims are a lord, a steward and a proctor. See also "The
Master-Maid" in Dr. (now Sir George) Dasent's "Popular Tales from
the Norse," Mr. Clouston, who gives these details more fully,
mentions a similar Scottish story concerning a lascivious monk
and the chaste wife of a miller.

[FN#212]When Easterns sit down to a drinking bout, which means to
get drunk as speedily and pleasantly as possible, they put off
dresses of dull colours and robe themselves in clothes supplied
by the host, of the brightest he may have, especially yellow,
green and red of different shades. So the lady's proceeding was
not likely to breed suspicion: al- though her tastes were
somewhat fantastic and like Miss Julia's--peculiar.

[FN#213] Arab. "Najasah," meaning anything unclean which requires
ablution before prayer. Unfortunately mucus is not of the number,
so the common Moslem is very offensive in the matter of nose.

[FN#214] Here the word "la'an" is used which most Moslems express
by some euphemism. The vulgar Egyptian says "Na'al" (Sapre and
Sapristi for Sacre and Sacristie), the Hindostani express it "I
send him the three letters"--lam, ayn and nun.

[FN#215] The Mac. Edit. is here very concise; better the Bresi.
Edit. (xii. 326). Here we have the Eastern form of the Three
Wishes which dates from the earliest ages and which amongst us
has been degraded to a matter of "black pudding." It is the
grossest and most brutal satire on the sex, suggesting that a
woman would prefer an additional inch of penis to anything this
world or the next can offer her. In the Book of Sindibad it is
the story of the Peri and Religious Man; his learning the Great
Name; and his consulting with his wife. See also La Fontaine's
"Trois Souhaits," Prior's "Ladle," and "Les quatre Souhaits de
Saint-Martin."

[FN#216] Arab. "Laylat al-Kadr"= Night of Power or of Divine
Decrees. It is "better than a thousand months" (Koran xcvii. 3),
but unhappily the exact time is not known although all agree that
it is one of the last ten in Ramazan. The latter when named by
Kilab ibn Murrah, ancestor of Mohammed, about two centuries
before Al-lslam, corresponded with July-August and took its name
from "Ramza" or intense heat. But the Prophet, in the tenth
Hijrah year, most unwisely forbade "Nasy"= triennial
intercalation (Koran ix. 36) and thus the lunar month went round
all the seasons. On the Night of Power the Koran was sent down
from the Preserved Tablet by Allah's throne, to the first or
lunar Heaven whence Gabriel brought it for opportunest revelation
to the Apostle (Koran xcvii.). Also during this night all Divine
Decrees for the ensuing year are taken from the Tablet and are
given to the angels for execution whilst, the gates of Heaven
being open, prayer (as in the text) is sure of success. This mass
of absurdity has engendered a host of superstitions everywhere
varying. Lane (Mod. Egypt, chapt. xxv.) describes how some of the
Faithful keep tasting a cup of salt water which should become
sweet in the Night of Nights. In (Moslem) India not only the sea
becomes sweet, but all the vegetable creation bows down before
Allah. The exact time is known only to Prophets; but the pious
sit through the Night of Ramazan 27th (our 26th) praying and
burning incense-pastilles. In Stambul this is officially held to
be the Night of Power. So in mediaeval Europe on Christmas Eve
the cattle worshipped God in their stalls and I have met peasants
in France and Italy who firmly believed that brute beasts on that
night not only speak but predict the events of the coming year.

[FN#217] Hence the misfortune befel her; the pious especially
avoid temporal palaces.

[FN#218] This is our tale of "The Maid and the Magpie;" the Mac.
Edit. does not specify the "Tayr" (any bird) but the Bresl. Edit.
has Ak'ak, a pie. The true Magpie (C. Pica) called Buzarai (?)
and Zaghzaghan Abu Massah (=the Sweeper, from its tail) is found
on the Libanus and Anti-Libanus (Unexplored Syria ii. 77-143),
but I never saw it in other parts of Syria or in Arabia. It is
completely ignored by the Reverend Mr. Tristram in his painfully
superficial book "The Natural History of the Bible," published by
the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (or rather
Ignorance), London, 1873.

[FN#219] This is "The Story of the Two Partridges," told at great
length in the Book of Sindibad. See De Sacy's text in the Kalilah
wa Damnah, quoted in the "Book of Kalilah and Damnah" (p. 306).

[FN#220] This extremely wilful young person had rendered rape
excusable. The same treat- ment is much called for by certain
heroines of modern fiction--let me mention Princess Napraxine.
          
[FN#221] The Story of the Hidden Robe, in the Book of Sindibad;
where it is told with all manner of Persian embellishments.

[FN#222] Now turned into Government offices for local
administration; a "Tribunal of Commerce," etc.

[FN#223] Arab. "Bawwab," a personage as important as the old
French concierge and a man of trust who has charge of the keys
and with letting vacant rooms. In Egypt the Berber from the Upper
Nile is the favourite suisse; being held more honest or rather
less rascally than the usual Egyptian. These Berbers, however,
are true barbarians, overfond of Buzah (the beer of Osiris) and
not unfrequently dangerous. They are supposed by Moslems to
descend from the old Syrians expelled by Joshua. For the
favourite chaff against them, eating the dog (not the puppy-pie),
see Pilgrimage i. 93. They are the "paddies', of Egypt to whom
all kinds of bulls and blunders are attributed.

[FN#224] Arab. "Juma'ah," which means either Friday or a week. In
pre-Moslem times it was called Al-Arubah (the other week-days
being Shiyar or Saturday, Bawal, Bahan Jabar, Dabar and Famunis
or Thursday). Juma'ah, literally = "Meeting" or Congregation
(-day), was made to represent the Jewish Sabbath and the
Christian Sunday because on that day Allah ended the work of
creation; it was also the date of Mohammed's entering Al-Medinah.
According to Al-Bayzawi, it was called Assembly day because Ka'ab
ibn Lowa, one of the Prophet's ancestors, used to gather the
people before him on Fridays. Moslems are not forbidden to do
secular work after the congregational prayers at the hour when
they must "hasten to the commemoration of Allah and leave
merchandising." (Koran, chaps. Ixii. 9.)

[FN#225] This is done only by the very pious: if they see a bit
of bread they kiss it, place it upon their heads and deposit it
upon a wall or some place where it will not be trodden on. She
also removed the stones lest haply they prove stumbling-blocks to
some Moslem foot.

 [FN#226] Arab. "Ashjar," which may mean either the door-posts or
the wooden bolts. Lane (iii. 174) translates it "among the trees"
in a room!

[FN#227] Koran (ix. 51), when Mohammed reproaches the unbelievers
for not accompanying him to victory or martyrdom.

[FN#228] Arab. "Kina," a true veil, not the "Burka " or "nose
bag" with the peep-holes. It is opposed to the "Tarkah" or "head
veil." Europeans inveigh against the veil which represents the
loup of Louis Quatorze's day: it is on the contrary the most
coquettish of contrivances, hiding coarse skins, fleshy noses,
wide mouths and vanishing chins, and showing only lustrous and
liquid black eyes. Moreover a pretty woman, when she wishes, will
always let you see something under the veil. (Pilgrimage i. 337.)

[FN#229] A yellow-flowered artemisia or absinthe whose wood burns
like holm-oak. (Unexplored Syria ii. 43.) See vol. ii. 24 for
further details.

[FN#230] The Farz or obligatory prayers, I have noted, must be
recited (if necessary) in the most impure place; not so the other
orisons. Hence the use of the "Sajjadah" or prayer-rug an article
too well known to require description.

[FN#231] Anglice a stomach-ache, a colic.

[FN#232] Arab. "Al-Hafizah" which has two meanings. Properly it
signifies the third order of Traditionists out of a total of five
or those who know 300,000 traditions and their ascriptions.
Popularly "one who can recite the Koran by rote." There are six
great Traditionists whose words are held to be prime authorities;
(1) Al-Bokhari, (2) Muslim, and these are entitled Al-Sahihayn,
The (two true) authorities. After them (3) Al-Tirmidi; and (4)
Abu Daud: these four being the authors of the "Four Sunan," the
others are (5) Al- Nasai and (6) Ibn Majah (see Jarrett's
Al-Siyuti pp. 2, 6; and, for modern Arab studies, Pilgrimage i.
154 et seq.).

[FN#233] Lane (iii. 176) marries the amorous couple, thus making
the story highly proper and robbing it of all its point.

[FN#234] Arab. "Sabbahat," i.e. Sabbah-ak' Allah bi'l khayr =
Allah give thee good morning: still the popular phrase.

[FN#235] Arab. "Ta'risak," with the implied hint of her being a
"Mu'arrisah" or she pander. The Bresl. Edit. (xii. 356) bluntly
says "Kivadatak" thy pimping.

[FN#236] Arab. "Rafw": the "Rafu-gar" or fine-drawer in India,
who does this artistic style of darning, is famed for skill.

[FN#237] The question sounds strange to Europeans, but in the
Moslem East a man knows nothing, except by hearsay, of the women
who visit his wife.

[FN#238] Arab. "Ahl al-bayt," so as not rudely to say "wife."

[FN#239] This is a mere abstract of the tale told in the
Introduction (vol. i. 10-12). Here however, the rings are about
eighty; there the number varies from ninety to five hundred and
seventy.

[FN#240] The father suspected the son of intriguing with one of
his own women.

[FN#241] Arab. and Heb. "Laban" (opp. to "laban-halib," or simply
"halib" = fresh milk), milk artificially soured, the Dahin of
India, the Kisaina of the Slavs and our Corstophine cream. But in
The Nights, contrary to modern popular usage, "Laban" is also
applied to Fresh milk. The soured form is universally in the East
eaten with rice and enters into the Salatah or cucumber-salad. I
have noted elsewhere that all the Galactophagi, the nomades who
live on milk, use it in the soured never in the fresh form. The
Badawi have curious prejudices about it: it is a disgrace to sell
it (though not to exchange it), and "Labban," or "milk-vendor,"
is an insult. The Brahni and Beloch pomades have the same
pundonor possibly learnt from the Arabs (Pilgrimage i. 363). For
'Igt (Akit), Mahir, Saribah, Jamidah and other lacteal
preparations, see ibid. i. 362.

[FN#242] I need hardly say that the poison would have been
utterly harmless, unless there had been an abrasion of the skin.
The slave- girl is blamed for carrying the jar uncovered because
thus it would attract the evil eye. In the Book of Sindibad the
tale appears as the Story of the Poisoned Guest; and the bird is
a stork.

[FN#243] The Prince expresses the pure and still popular Moslem
feeling; and yet the learned and experienced Mr Redhouse would
confuse this absolute Predestination with Providence. A friend
tells me that the idea of absolute Fate in The Nights makes her
feel as if the world were a jail.
     
[FN#244] In the Book of Sindibad this is the Story of the
Sandal-wood Merchant and the Advice of the Blind Old Man. Mr.
Clouston (p. 163) quotes a Talmudic joke which is akin to the
Shaykh's advice and a reply of Tyl Eulenspiegel, the arch-rogue,
which has also a family resemblance.

[FN#245] Arab. "Sa'a," a measure of corn, etc., to be given in
alms. The Kamus makes it = four mudds (each being 1/3 lbs.); the
people understand by it four times the measure of a man's two
open hands.

[FN#246] i.e. till thou restore my eye to me. This style of
prothesis without apodosis is very common in Arabic and should be
preserved in translation, as it adds a naivete to the style. We
find it in Genesis iii. 2, "And now lest he put forth his hand,"
etc.

[FN#247] They were playing at Murahanah, like children amongst
us. It is also called "Hukm wa Riza" = order and consent. The
penalty is usually something ridiculous, but here it was
villainous.

[FN#248] Every Moslem capital has a "Shaykh of the thieves" who
holds a regular levees and who will return stolen articles for
consideration; and this has lasted since the days of Diodorus
Siculus (Pilgrimage i. 91).

[FN#249] This was not the condition; but I have left the text as
it is characteristic of the writer's inconsequence.

[FN#250] The idea would readily occur in Egypt where the pulex is
still a plague although the Sultan is said to hold his court at
Tiberias. "Male and female" says the rouge, otherwise it would be
easy to fill a bushel with fleas. The insect was unknown to older
India according to some and was introduced by strangers. This
immigration is quite possible. In 1863 the jigger (P. penetrans)
was not found in Western Africa; when I returned there in 1882 it
had passed over from the Brazil and had become naturalised on the
equatorial African seaboard. the Arabs call shrimps and prawns
"sea-fleas" (barguth al-bahr) showing an inland race. (See
Pilgrimage i. 322.)

[FN#251] Submission to the Sultan and the tidings of his
well-being should content every Eastern subject. But, as Oriental
history shows, the form of government is a Despotism tempered by
assassination. And under no rule is man socially freer and his
condition contrasts strangely with the grinding social tyranny
which characterises every mode of democracy or constitutionalism,
i.e. political equality.

[FN#252] Here the text has "Markub" = a shoe; elsewhere "Na'al" =
a sandal, especially with wooden sole. In classical Arabia,
however, "Na'al" may be a shoe, a horse-shoe (iron-plate, not rim
like ours). The Bresl. Edit. has "Wata," any foot-gear.

[FN#253] Water-melons (batayikh) says the Mac. Edit. a misprint
for Aruz or rice. Water-melons are served up raw cut into square
mouthfuls, to be eaten with rice and meat. They serve excellently
well to keep the palate clean and cool.

[FN#254] The text recounts the whole story over again - more than
European patience can bear.

[FN#255] The usual formula when telling an improbable tale. But
here it is hardly called for: the same story is told (on weak
authority) of the Alewife, the Three Graziers and
Attorney-General Nay (temp. James II. 1577-1634) when five years
old (Journ. Asiat. Soc. N.S. xxx. 280). The same feat had been
credited to Thomas Egerton, Lord Chancellor in A.D. 1540-1617
(Chalmers, Biographical Dictionary xxiii. 267-68). But the story
had already found its way into the popular jest-books such as
"Tales and Quick Answers, very Mery and Pleasant to Rede" (1530);
"Jacke of Dover's Quest of Inquirie for the Foole of all Fooles"
(1604) under the title "The Foole of Westchester", and in "Witty
and Entertaining Exploits of George Buchanan, commonly called the
King's Fool." The banker-bard Rogers (in Italy) was told a
similar story concerning a widow of the Lambertini house (xivth
centry). Thomas Wright (Introducition to the Seven Sages) says he
had met the tale in Latin( xiiith-xivth centuries) and a variant
in the "Nouveaux Contes a rire (Amsterdam 1737), under the title
"Jugement Subtil du Duc d'Ossone contre Deux Marchands." Its
origin is evidently the old Sindibad-namah translated from Syriac
into Greek ("Syntipas," xith century); into Hebrew (Mishle
Sandabar, xiith century) and from the Arabian version into old
Castilian, "Libro de los Engannos et los Asayamientos de las
Mugeres" (A.D. 1255), whereof a translation is appended to
Professor Comparetti's Socitey. The Persion metrical form (an
elaboration of one much older) dates from 1375; and gave rise to
a host of imitations such as the Turkish Tales of the Forty
Wazirs and the Canarese "Katha Manjari," where four persons
contend about a purse. See also Gladwin's "Persian Moonshee," No.
vi. of "Pleasing Stories;" and Mr. Clouston's paper, "The Lost
Purse," in the Glasgow Evening Times. All are the Eastern form of
Gavarni's "Enfants Terribles," showing the portentous precocity
for which some children (infant phenomena, calculating boys, etc.
etc.) have been famous.

[FN#256] From the Bresl. Edit. xii. 381. The Sa'lab or Abu Hosayn
(Father of the Fortlet) is the fox, in Marocco Akkab: Talib Yusuf
and Wa'wi are the jackal. Arabas have not preserved "Jakal" from
the Heb. Shu'al and Persian Shaghal and Persian Shaghal (not
Shagul) as the Rev. Mr. Tristram misinforms his readers. (Nat.
Hist. p. 85)

[FN#257] The name is old and classical Arabic: in Antar the young
Amazon Jayda was called Judar in public (Story of Jayda and
Khalid). It is also, as will be seen, the name of a quarter in
Cairo, and men are often called after such places, e.g. Al-Jubni
from the Suk al Jubn in Damascus. The story is exceedingly
Egyptian and the style abounds in Cairene vulgarisms, especially
in the Bresl. Edit. ix. 311.

[FN#258] Had the merchant left his property to be divided after
his death and not made a will he widow would have had only
one-eighth instead of a fourth.

[FN#259] Lit. "from tyrant to tyrant," i.e. from official to
official, Al-Zalamah, the "tyranny" of popular parlance.

[FN#260] The coin is omitted in the text but it is evidently the
"Nusf" or half-dirham. Lane (iii.235), noting that the dinar is
worth 170 "nusfs" in this tale, thinks that it was written (or
copied?) after the Osmanh Conquest of Egypt. Unfortunately he
cannot tell the precise period when the value of the small change
fell so low.

[FN#261] Arab "Yaum mubarak!" still a popular exclamation.

[FN#262] i.e. of the door of daily bread.

[FN#263] Arab. "Sirah," a small fish differently described (De
Sacy, "Relation de l'Egypte par Abd allatif," pp. 278-288: Lane,
Nights iii. 234. It is not found in Sonnini's list.

[FN#264] A tank or lakelet in the southern parts of Cairo, long
ago filled up; Von Hammer believes it inherited the name of the
old Charon's Lake of Memphis, over which corpses were ferried.

[FN#265] Thus making the agreement a kind of religious covenant,
as Catholics would recite a Pater or an Ave Maria.

[FN#266] Arab. "Ya miskim"=O poor devil; mesquin, meschino, words
evidently derived from the East.

[FN#267] Plur. of Maghribi a Western man, a Moor. I have already
derived the word through the Lat. "Maurus" from Maghribiyun.
Europeans being unable to pronounce the Ghayn (or gh like the
modern Cairenes) would turn it into "Ma'ariyun." They are mostly
of the Maliki school (for which see Sale) and are famous as
magicians and treasure-finders. Amongst the suite of the late
Amir Abd al-Kadir, who lived many years and died in Damascus, I
found several men profoundly versed in Eastern spiritualism and
occultism.

 [FN#268] The names are respectively, Slave of the Salvation, of
the One (God), of the Eternal; of the Compassionate; and of the
Loving.

[FN#269] i.e. "the most profound"; the root is that of "Batini,"
a gnostic, a reprobate.

[FN#270] i.e. the Tall One.

[FN#271] The loud pealing or (ear-) breaking Thunder.

[FN#272] Arab. "Fas and Miknas" which the writer evidently
regards as one city. "Fas" means a hatchet, from the tradition of
one having been found, says Ibn Sa'id, when digging the base
under the founder Idris bin Idris (A.D. 808). His sword was
placed on the pinnacle of the minaret built by the Imam Abu Ahmad
bin Abi Bakr enclosed in a golden etui studded with pearls and
precious stones. From the local pronunciation "Fes" is derived
the red cap of the nearer Moslem East (see Ibn Batutah p. 230).

[FN#273] Arab. "Al-Khurj," whence the Span. Las Alforjas.

[FN#274] Arab. "Kebab," mutton or lamb cut into small squares and
grilled upon skewers: it is the roast meat of the nearer East
where, as in the West, men have not learned to cook meat so as to
preserve all its flavour. This is found in the "Asa'o" of the
Argentine Gaucho who broils the flesh while still quivering and
before the fibre has time to set. Hence it is perfectly tender,
if the animal be young, and has a "meaty" taste half lost by
keeping

[FN#275] Equivalent to our puritanical "Mercy."

[FN#276] Arab. "Bukjah," from the Persian Bukcheh: a favourite
way of keeping fine clothes in the East is to lay them folded in
a piece of rough long-cloth with pepper and spices to drive away
moths.

[FN#277] This is always specified, for respectable men go out of
town on horse-back, never on "foot-back," as our friends the
Boers say. I have seen a Syrian put to sore shame when compelled
by politeness to walk with me, and every acquaintance he met
addressed him "Anta Zalamah!" What! afoot?

[FN#278] This tale, including the Enchanted Sword which slays
whole armies, was adopted in Europe as we see in Straparola (iv.
3), and the "Water of Life" which the Grimms found in Hesse,
etc., "Gammer Grethel's German Popular Stories," Edgar Taylor,
Bells, 1878; and now published in fuller form as "Grimm's
Household Tales," by Mrs. Hunt, with Introduction by A. Lang, 2
vols. 8vo, 1884. It is curious that so biting and carping a
critic, who will condescend to notice a misprint in another's
book, should lay himself open to general animadversion by such a
rambling farrago of half-digested knowledge as that which
composes Mr. Andrew Lang's Introduction.

[FN#279] These retorts of Judar are exactly what a sharp Egyptian
Fellah would say on such occasions.

[FN#280] Arab. "Salamat," plur. of Salam, a favourite Egyptian
welcome.

[FN#281] This sentence expresses a Moslem idea which greatly
puzzles strangers. Arabic has no equivalent of our "Thank you"
(Kassara 'llah Khayr-ak being a mere blessing Allah increase thy
weal!), nor can Al-lslam express gratitude save by a periphrase.
The Moslem acknowledges a favour by blessing the donor and by
wishing him increase of prosperity. "May thy shadow never be
less! " means, Mayest thou always extend to me thy shelter and
protection. I have noticed this before but it merits repetition.
Strangers, and especially Englishmen, are very positive and very
much mistaken upon a point, which all who have to do with
Egyptians and Arabs ought thoroughly to understand. Old dwellers
in the East know that the theory of ingratitude in no way
interferes with the sense of gratitude innate in man (and beast)
and that the "lively sense of favours to come," is as quick in
Orient land as in Europe.

[FN#282] Outside this noble gate, the Bab al-Nay, there is a
great cemetery wherein, by the by, lies Burckhardt, my
predecessor as a Hajj to Meccah and Al-Medinah. Hence many
beggars are always found squatting in its neighbourhood.

[FN#283] Friends sometimes walk alongside the rider holding the
stirrup in sign of affection and respect, especially to the
returning pilgrim.

[FN#284] Equivalent to our Alas! It is woman's word never used by
men; and foreigners must be most careful of this distinction
under pain of incurring something worse than ridicule. I remember
an officer in the Bombay Army who, having learned Hindostani from
women, always spoke of himself in the feminine and hugely
scandalised the Sepoys.

[FN#285] i.e. a neighbour. The "quarters" of a town in the East
are often on the worst of terms. See Pilgrimage.

[FN#286] In the patriarchal stage of society the mother waits
upon her adult sons. Even in Dalmatia I found, in many
old-fashioned houses, the ladies of the family waiting upon the
guests. Very pleasant, but somewhat startling at first.

[FN#287] Here the apodosis would be "We can all sup together." 

[FN#288] Arab. "Zawiyah" (=oratory), which is to a Masjid what a
chapel is to a church.

[FN#289] Arab. "Kasr," prop. a palace: so the Tuscan peasant
speaks of his "palazzo."

[FN#290] This sale of a free-born Moslem was mere felony. But
many centuries later Englishmen used to be sold and sent to the
plantations in America.

[FN#291] Arab. "Kawwas," lit. an archer, suggesting les archers
de la Sainte Hermandade. In former days it denoted a sergeant, an
apparitor, an officer who executed magisterial orders. In modern
Egypt he became a policeman (Pilgrimage i. 29). As "Cavass" he
appears in gorgeous uniform and sword, an orderly attached to
public offices and Consulates.

[FN#292] A purely imaginary King.

[FN#293] The Bresl. Edit. (ix. 370) here and elsewhere uses the
word "Nutiya"=Nauta, for the common Bahriyah or Mallah.

[FN#294] Arab. "Tawaf," the name given to the sets (Ashwat) of
seven circuits with the left shoulder presented to the Holy
House, that is walking "widdershins" or "against the sun" ("with
the sun" being like the movement of a watch). For the requisites
of this rite see Pilgrimage iii. 234.

[FN#295] Arab. "Akh"; brother has a wide signification amongst
Moslems and may be used to and of any of the Saving Faith.

[FN#296] Said by the master when dismissing a servant and
meaning, "I have not failed in my duty to thee!" The answer is,
"Allah acquit thee thereof!'

[FN#297] A Moslem prison is like those of Europe a century ago;
to think of it gives gooseflesh. Easterns laugh at our idea of
penitentiary and the Arabs of Bombay call it "Al-Bistan" (the
Garden) because the court contains a few trees and shrubs. And
with them a garden always suggests an idea of Paradise. There are
indeed only two efficacious forms of punishment all the world
over, corporal for the poor and fines for the rich, the latter
being the severer form.

[FN#298] i.e. he shall answer for this.

[FN#299] A pun upon "Khaliyah" (bee hive) and "Khaliyah" (empty).
Khaliyah is properly a hive of bees with a honey-comb in the
hollow of a tree-trunk, opposed to Kawwarah, hive made of clay or
earth (Al-Hariri; Ass. of Tiflis). There are many other terms,
for Arabs are curious about honey. Pilgrimage iii. 110.

[FN#300] Lane (iii. 237) supposes by this title that the author
referred his tale to the days of the Caliphate. "Commander of the
Faithful" was, I have said, the style adopted by Omar in order to
avoid the clumsiness of "Caliph" (successor) of the Caliph (Abu
Bakr) of the Apostle of Allah.

[FN#301] eastern thieves count four modes of housebreaking,
(1)picking out burnt bricks; (2) cutting through unbaked bricks;
(3) wetting a mud wall and (4) boring through a wooden wall
(Vikram and the Vampire p. 172).

[FN#302] Arab. "Zabbat," lit. a lizard (fem.) also a wooden lock,
the only one used throughout Egypt. An illustration of its
curious mechanism is given in Lane (M. E. Introduction)

[FN#303] Arab. "Dabbus." The Eastern mace is well known to
English collectors, it is always of metal, and mostly of steel,
with a short handle like our facetiously called "life-preterver "
The head is in various forms, the simplest a ball, smooth and
round, or broken into sundry high and angular ridges like a
melon, and in select weapons shaped like the head of some animal.
bull, etc. See Night dcxlvi.

[FN#304] The red habit is a sign of wrath and vengeance and the
Persian Kings like Fath Al Shah, used to wear it when about to
order some horrid punishment, such as the "Shakk"; in this a man
was hung up by his heels and cut in two from the fork downwards
to the neck, when a turn of the chopper left that untouched.
White robes denoted peace and mercy as well as joy. The "white"
hand and "black" hand have been explained. A "white death" is
quiet and natural, with forgiveness of sins. A "black death" is
violent and dreadful, as by strangulation; a "green death" is
robing in rags and patches like a dervish, and a "red death" is
by war or bloodshed (A. P. ii. 670). Among the mystics it is the
resistance of man to his passions. 

[FN#305] This in the East is the way "pour se faire valoir";
whilst Europeans would hold it a mere "bit of impudence." aping
dignity.

[FN#306] The Chief Mufti or Doctor of the Law, an appointment
first made by the Osmanli Mohammed II., when he captured
Constantinople in A.D. 1453. Before that time the functions were
discharged by the Kazi al-Kuzat (Kazi-in-Chief), the Chancellor.

[FN#307] So called because here lived the makers of crossbows
(Arab. Bunduk now meaning a fire piece, musket, etc.). It is the
modern district about the well-known Khan al-Hamzawi.

[FN#308] Pronounced "Goodareeyyah," and so called after one of
the troops of the Fatimite Caliphs. The name "Yamaniyah" is
probably due to the story-teller's inventiveness.

[FN#309] I have noted that as a rule in The Nights poetical
justice is administered with much rigour and exactitude. Here,
however, the tale-teller allows the good brother to be slain by
the two wicked brothers as he permitted the adulterous queens to
escape the sword of Kamar al-Zaman. Dr. Steingass brings to my
notice that I have failed to do justice to the story of Sharrkan
(vol. ii., p. 172), where I note that the interest is injured by
the gratuitous incest But this has a deeper meaning and a grander
artistic effect. Sharrkan begins with most unbrotherly feelings
towards his father's children by a second wife. But Allah's
decree forces him to love his half-sister despite himself, and
awe and repentance convert the savage, who joys at the news of
his brother's reported death, to a loyal and devoted subject of
the same brother. But Judar with all his goodness proved himself
an arrant softy and was no match for two atrocious villains. And
there may be overmuch of forgiveness as of every other good
thing.

[FN#310] In such case the "'iddah" would be four months and ten
days.

[FN#311] Not quite true. Weil's German version, from a MS. in the
Ducal Library of Gotha gives the "Story of Judar of Cairo and
Mahmud of Tunis" in a very different form. It has been pleasantly
"translated (from the German) and edited" by Mr. W. F. Kirby, of
the British Museum, under the title of "The New Arabian Nights"
(London: W. Swan Sonnenschein & Co.), and the author kindly sent
me a copy. "New Arabian Nights" seems now to have become a
fashionable title applied without any signification: such at
least is the pleasant collection of Nineteenth Century
Novelettes, published under that designation by Mr. Robert Louis
Stevenson, Chatto and Windus, Piccadilly, 1884.

[FN#312] Von Hammer holds this story to be a satire on Arab
superstition and the compulsory propagation, the compelle
intrare, of Al-Islam. Lane (iii. 235) omits it altogether for
reasons of his own. I differ with great diffidence from the
learned Baron whose Oriental reading was extensive; but the tale
does not seem to justify his explanations. It appears to me
simply one of the wilder romances, full of purposeful
anachronisms (e.g. dated between Abraham and Moses, yet quoting
the Koran) and written by someone familiar with the history of
Oman. The style too is peculiar, in many places so abrupt that
much manipulation is required to make it presentable: it suits,
however, the rollicking, violent brigand-like life which it
depicts. There is only one incident about the end which justifies
Von Hammer's suspicion.

[FN#313] The Persian hero of romance who converses with the
Simurgh or Griffin.

[FN#314] 'The word is as much used in Egypt as wunderbar in
Germany. As an exclamation is equivalent to "mighty fine!"

[FN#315] In modern days used in a bad sense, as a freethinker,
etc. So Dalilah the Wily is noted to be a philosopheress.

[FN#316] The game is much mixed up after Arab fashion. The
"Tufat" is the Siyahgosh= Black-ears, of India (Felis caracal),
the Persian lynx, which gives very good sport with Dachshunds.
Lynxes still abound in the thickets near Cairo

[FN#317] The "Sons of Kahtan," especially the Ya'arubah tribe,
made much history in Oman. Ya'arub (the eponymus) is written
Ya'arab and Ya'arib; but Ya'arub (from Ya'arubu Aorist of 'Aruba)
is best, because according to all authorities he was the first to
cultivate primitive Arabian speech and Arabic poetry. (Caussin de
Perceval's Hist. des Arabes i.50, etc.)

[FN#318] He who shooteth an arrow by night. See the death of
Antar shot down in the dark by the archer Jazar, son of Jabir,
who had been blinded by a red hot sabre passed before his eyes. I
may note that it is a mere fiction of Al-Asma'i, as the real
'Antar (or 'Antarah) lived to a good old age, and probably died
the "straw death."

[FN#319] See vol. ii., p. 77, for a reminiscence of masterful
King Kulayb and his Hima or domain. Here the phrase would mean,
"None could approach them when they were wroth; none were safe
from their rage." 

[FN#320] The sons of Nabhan (whom Mr. Badger calls Nebhan)
supplied the old Maliks or Kings of Oman. (History of the Imams
and Sayyids of Oman, etc., London, Hakluyt Soc. 1871.)

[FN#321] This is a sore insult in Arabia, where they have not
dreamt of a "Jawab-club," like that of Calcutta in the old days,
to which only men who had been half a dozen times "jawab'd" (=
refused in Anglo-lndian jargon) could belong. "I am not a
stallion to be struck on the nose," say the Arabs.

[FN#322] Again "inverted speech": it is as if we said, "Now,
you're a damned fine fellow, so," etc. "Allah curse thee! Thou
hast guarded thy women alive and dead;" said the man of Sulaym in
admiration after thrusting his spear into the eye of dead
Rabi'ah.

[FN#323] The Badawi use javelins or throw-spears of many kinds,
especially the prettily worked Mizrak (Pilgrimage i. 349); spears
for footmen (Shalfah, a bamboo or palm-stick with a head about a
hand broad), and the knightly lance, a male bamboo some 12 feet
long with iron heel and a long tapering point often of open work
or damascened steel, under which are tufts of black ostrich
feathers, one or two. I never saw a crescent-shaped head as the
text suggests. It is a "Pundonor" not to sell these weapons: you
say, "Give me that article and I will satisfy thee!" After which
the Sons of the Sand will haggle over each copper as if you were
cheapening a sheep. (Ibid. iii. 73.)

[FN#324] The shame was that Gharib had seen the girl and had
fallen in love with her beauty instead of applying for her hand
in recognised form. These punctilios of the Desert are peculiarly
nice and tetchy; nor do strangers readily realise them. 

[FN#325] The Arabs derive these Noachidae from Imlik, great-
grandson of Shem, who after the confusion of tongues settled at
Sana'a, then moved North to Meccah and built the fifth Ka'abah.
The dynastic name was Arkam, M. C. de Perceval's "Arcam," which
he would identify with Rekem (Numbers xxxi. 8). The last Arkam
fell before an army sent by Moses to purge the Holy Land (Al-
Hijaz) of idolatry. Commentators on the Koran (chaps. vii.) call
the Pharaoh of Moses Al-Walid and derive him from the Amalekites:
we have lately ascertained that this Mene-Ptah was of the
Shepherd-Kings and thus, according to the older Moslems, the
Hyksos were of the seed of Imlik. (Pilgrimage ii. 116, and iii.
190.) In Syria they fought with Joshua son of Nun. The tribe or
rather nationality was famous and powerful: we know little about
it and I may safely predict that when the Amalekite country shall
have been well explored, it will produce monuments second in
importance only to the Hittites. "A nomadic tribe which occupied
the Peninsula of Sinai" (Smith's Dict. of the Bible) is
peculiarly superficial, even for that most superficial of books.

[FN#326] The Amalekites were giants and lived 500 years.
(Pilgrimage, loc. cit.) 

[FN#327] His men being ninety against five hundred.

[FN#328] Arab. "Kaum" (pron. Gum) here=a razzia, afterwards=a
tribe. Relations between Badawi tribes are of three kinds; (1)
Ashab, allies offensive and defensive, friends who intermarry;
(2) Kiman (plur. of Kaum) when the blood-feud exists, and (3)
Akhwan= brothers. The last is a complicated affair, "Akhawat" or
brotherhood, denotes the tie between patron and client (a noble
and an ignoble tribe) or between the stranger and the tribe which
claims an immemorial and unalienable right to its own lands.
Hence a small fee (Al-Rifkah) must be paid and the traveller and
his beast become "dakhil," or entitled to brother-help. The
guardian is known in the West as Rafik; Rabi'a in Eastern Arabia;
Ghafir in "Sinai ;" amongst the Somal, Abban and the Gallas
Mogasa. Further details are given in Pilgrimage iii. 85-87. 

[FN#329] Arab. "Mal," here=Badawi money, flocks and herds, our
"fee" from feoh, vieh, cattle; as pecunia from pecus, etc., etc.

[FN#330] The litholatry of the old Arabs is undisputed: Manat the
goddess-idol was a large rude stone and when the Meccans sent out
colonies these carried with them stones of the Holy Land to be
set up and worshipped like the Ka'abah. I have suggested
(Pilgrimage iii. 159) that the famous Black Stone of Meccah,
which appears to me a large aerolite, is a remnant of this
worship and that the tomb of Eve near Jeddah was the old "Sakhrah
tawilah" or Long Stone (ibid. iii. 388). Jeddah is now translated
the grandmother, alluding to Eve, a myth of late growth: it is
properly