ures and Provider of their provision, and
Ordainer of their life terms preordained!" Then he kissed the
King's hand and wished him long life, and the King kissed his
head and said to him, "O Badr Basim, tell me thy history from
commencement to conclusion." So he told him his whole tale,
concealing naught; and the King marvelled thereat and said to
him, "O Badr Basim, Allah hath saved thee from the spell: but
what hath thy judgment decided and what thinkest thou to do?"
Replied he, "O King of the Age, I desire thy bounty that thou
equip me a ship with a company of thy servants and all that is
needful; for 'tis long since I have been absent and I dread
lest the kingdom depart from me. And I misdoubt me my mother
is dead of grief for my loss, and this doubt is the stronger
for that she knoweth not what is come of me nor whether I am
alive or dead. Wherefore, I beseech thee, O King, to crown thy
favours to me by granting me what I seek." The King, after
beholding the beauty and grace of Badr Basim and listening to
his sweet speech, said, "I hear and obey." So he fitted him
out a ship, to which he transported all that was needful and
which he manned with a company of his servants; and Badr Basim
set sail in it, after having taken leave of the King. They
sailed over the sea ten successive days with a favouring wind;
but, on the eleventh day, the ocean became troubled with
exceeding trouble, the ship rose and fell and the sailors were
powerless to govern her. So they drifted at the mercy of the
waves, till the craft neared a rock in mid-sea which fell upon
her[FN#336] and broke her up and all on board were drowned,
save King Badr Basim who got astride one of the planks of the
vessel, after having been nigh upon destruction. The plank
ceased not to be borne by the set of the sea, whilst he knew
not whither he went and had no means of directing its motion,
as the wind and waves wrought for three whole days. But on the
fourth the plank grounded with him on the sea shore where he
sighted a white city, as it were a dove passing white, builded
upon a tongue of land that jutted out into the deep and it was
goodly of ordinance, with high towers and lofty walls against
which the waves beat. When Badr Basim saw this, he rejoiced
with exceeding joy, for he was well-nigh dead of hunger and
thirst, and dismounting from the plank, would have gone up the
beach to the city; but there came down to him mules and asses
and horses, in number as the see sends and fell to striking at
him and staying him from landing. So he swam round to the back
of the city, where he waded to shore and entering the place,
found none therein and marvelled at this, saying, "Would I
knew to whom cloth this city belong, wherein is no lord nor
any liege, and whence came these mules and asses and horses
that hindered me from landing." And he mused over his case.
Then he walked on at hazard till he espied an old man, a
grocer.[FN#337] So he saluted him and the other returned his
salam and seeing him to be a handsome young man, said to him,
"O youth, whence comest thou and what brought thee to this
city?" Badr told him his story; at which the old man marvelled
and said, "O my son, didst thou see any on thy way?" He
replied, "Indeed, O my father, I wondered in good sooth to
sight a city void of folk." Quoth the Shaykh, my son, come up
into the shop, lest thou perish." So Badr Basim went up into
the shop and sat down; whereupon the old man set before him
somewhat of food, saying, "O my son, enter the inner shop;
glory be to Him who hath preserved thee from yonder she-
Sathanas!" King Badr Basim was sore affrighted at the grocer's
words; but he ate his fill and washed his hands then glanced
at his host and said to him, "O my lord, what is the meaning
of these words? Verily thou hast made me fearful of this city
and its folk." Replied the old man, "Know, O my son that this
is the City of the Magicians and its Queen is as she were She-
Satan, a sorceress and a mighty enchantress, passing crafty
and perfidious exceedingly. All thou sawest of horses and
mules and asses were once sons of Adam like thee and me; they
were also strangers, for whoever entereth this city, being a
young man like thyself this miscreant witch taketh him and
hometh him for forty days, after which she enchanteth him, and
he becometh a mule or a horse or an ass, of those animals thou
sawest on the sea-shore."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
old grocer related to King Badr Basim the history of the
enchantress ending with, "All these people hath she spelled;
and, when it was thy intent to land they feared lest thou be
transmewed like themselves; so they counselled thee by signs
that said, 'Land not,' of their solicitude for thee, fearing
that haply she should do with thee like as she had done with
them. She possessed herself of this city and seized it from
its citizens by sorcery and her name is Queen Lab, which being
interpreted, meaneth in Arabic 'Almanac of the Sun.' "[FN#338]
When Badr Basim heard what the old man said, he was affrighted
with sore affright and trembled like reed in wind saying in
himself, "Hardly do I feel me free from the affliction wherein
I was by reason of sorcery, when Destiny casteth me into yet
sorrier case!" And he fell a-musing over his condition and
that which had betided him. When the Shaykh looked at him and
saw the violence of his terror, he said to him, "O my son,
come, sit at the threshold of the shop and look upon yonder
creatures and upon their dress and complexion and that wherein
they are by reason of gramarye and dread not; for the Queen
and all in the city love and tender me and will not vex my
heart or trouble my mind." So King Badr Basim came out and sat
at the shop door, looking out upon the folk; and there passed
by him a world of creatures without number. But when the
people saw him, they accosted the grocer and said to him, "O
elder, is this thy captive and thy prey gotten in these days?"
The old man replied, "He is my brother's son, I heard that his
father was dead; so I sent for him and brought him here that I
might quench with him the fire of my home sickness." Quoth
they, "Verily, he is a comely youth; but we fear for him from
Queen Lab, lest she turn on thee with treachery and take him
from thee, for she loveth handsome young men." Quoth the
Shaykh, "The Queen will not gainsay my commandment, for she
loveth and tendereth me; and when she shall know that he is my
brother's son, she will not molest him or afflict me in him
neither trouble my heart on his account." Then King Badr Basim
abode some months with the grocer, eating and drinking, and
the old man loved him with exceeding love. One day, as he sat
in the shop according to his custom, behold, there came up a
thousand eunuchs, with drawn swords and clad in various kinds
of raiment and girt with jewelled girdles: all rode Arabian
steeds and bore in baldrick Indian blades. They saluted the
grocer, as they passed his shop and were followed by a
thousand damsels like moons, clad in various raiments of silks
and satins fringed with gold and embroidered with jewels of
sorts, and spears were slung to their shoulders. In their
midst rode a damsel mounted on a Rabite mare, saddled with a
saddle of gold set with various kinds of jewels and jacinths;
and they reached in a body the Shaykh's shop. The damsels
saluted him and passed on, till, lo and behold! up came Queen
Lab, in great state, and seeing King Badr Basim sitting in the
shop, as he were the moon at its full, was amazed at his
beauty and loveliness and became passionately enamoured of
him, and distraught with desire of him. So she alighted and
sitting down by King Badr Basim said to the old man, "Whence
hadst thou this handsome one?"; and the Shaykh replied, "He is
my brother's son, and is lately come to me." Quoth Lab, "Let
him be with me this night, that I may talk with him;' and
quoth the old man, "Wilt thou take him from me and not enchant
him?" Said she, "Yes," and said he, Swear to me." So she sware
to him that she would not do him any hurt or ensorcell him,
and bidding bring him a fine horse, saddled and bridled with a
golden bridle and decked with trappings all of gold set with
jewels, gave the old man a thousand dinars saying, "Use
this.''[FN#339] Then she took Badr Basim and carried him off,
as he were the full moon on its fourteenth night, whilst all
the folk, seeing his beauty, were grieved for him and said,
"By Allah, verily, this youth deserveth not to be bewitched by
yonder sorceress, the accursed!" Now King Badr Basim heard all
they said, but was silent, committing his case to Allah
Almighty, till they came to--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Badr Basim ceased not faring with Queen Lab and her suite till
they came to her palace-gate, where the Emirs and eunuchs and
Lords of the realm took foot and she bade the Chamberlains
dismiss her Officers and Grandees, who kissed ground and went
away, whilst she entered the palace with Badr Basim and her
eunuchs and women. Here he found a place, whose like he had
never seen at all, for it was builded of gold and in its midst
was a great basin brimfull of water midmost a vast flower-
garden. He looked at the garden and saw it abounding in birds
of various kinds and colours, warbling in all manner tongues
and voices pleasurable and plaintive. And everywhere he beheld
great state and dominion and said, "Glory be to God, who of
His bounty and long suffering provideth those who serve other
than Himself!" The Queen sat down at a latticed window
overlooking the garden on a couch of ivory, whereon was a high
bed, and King Badr Basim seated himself by her side. She
kissed him and pressing him to her breast, bade her women
bring a tray of food. So they brought a tray of red gold,
inlaid with pearls and jewels and spread with all manner of
viands and he and she ate, till they were satisfied, and
washed their hands; after which the waiting women set on
flagons of gold and silver and glass, together with all kinds
of flowers and dishes of dried fruits. Then the Queen summoned
the singing-women and there came ten maidens, as they were
moons, bending all manner of musical instruments. Queen Lab
crowned a cup and drinking it off, filled another and passed
it to King Badr Basim, who took and drank; and they ceased not
to drink till they had their sufficiency. Then she bade the
damsels sing, and they sang all manner modes till it seemed to
Badr Basim as if the palace danced with him for joy. His sense
was ecstasied and his breast broadened, and he forgot his
strangerhood and said in himself, "Verily, this Queen is young
and beautiful[FN#340] and I will never leave her; for her
kingdom is vaster than my kingdom and she is fairer than
Princess Jauharah.'' So he ceased not to drink with her till
even tide came, when they lighted the lamps and waxen candles
and diffused censer-perfumes; nor did they leave drinking,
till they were both drunken, and the singing women sang the
while. Then Queen Lab, being in liquor, rose from her seat and
lay down on a bed and dismissing her women called to Badr
Basim to come and sleep by her side. So he lay with her, in
all delight of life till the morning.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Queen awoke she repaired to the Hammam-bath in the palace,
King Badr Basim being with her, and they bathed and were
purified; after which she clad him in the finest of raiment
and called for the service of wine. So the waiting women
brought the drinking-gear and they drank. Presently, the Queen
arose and taking Badr Basim by the hand, sat down with him on
chairs and bade bring food, whereof they ate, and washed their
hands. Then the damsels fetched the drinking gear and fruits
and flowers and confections, and they ceased not to eat and
drink,[FN#341] whilst the singing-girls sang various airs till
the evening. They gave not over eating and drinking and merry-
making for a space of forty days, when the Queen said to him,
"O Badr Basim, say me whether is the more pleasant, this place
or the shop of thine uncle the grocer?" He replied, "By Allah,
O Queen, this is the pleasenter, for my uncle is but a
beggarly man, who vendeth pot-herbs." She laughed at his words
and the twain lay together in the pleasantest of case till the
morning, when King Badr Basim awoke from sleep and found not
Queen Lab by his side, so he said, "Would Heaven I knew where
can she have gone!" And indeed he was troubled at her absence
and perplexed about the case, for she stayed away from him a
great while and did not return; so he donned his dress and
went seeking her but not finding her, and he said to himself,
"Haply, she is gone to the flower-garden." Thereupon he went
out into the garden and came to a running rill beside which he
saw a white she-bird and on the stream-bank a tree full of
birds of various colours, and he stood and watched the birds
without their seeing him. And behold, a black bird flew down
upon that white-she bird and fell to billing her pigeon-
fashion, then he leapt on her and trod her three consecutive
times, after which the bird changed and became a woman. Badr
looked at her and lo! it was Queen Lab. So he knew that the
black bird was a man transmewed and that she was enamoured of
him and had transformed herself into a bird, that he might
enjoy her; wherefore jealousy got hold upon him and he was
wroth with the Queen because of the black bird. Then he
returned to his place and lay down on the carpet-bed and after
an hour or so she came back to him and fell to kissing him and
jesting with him; but being sore incensed against her he
answered her not a word. She saw what was to do with him and
was assured that he had witnessed what befel her when she was
a white bird and was trodden by the black bird; yet she
discovered naught to him but concealed what ailed her. When he
had done her need, he said to her, "O Queen, I would have thee
give me leave to go to my uncle's shop, for I long after him
and have not seen him these forty days." She replied, "Go to
him but tarry not from me, for I cannot brook to be parted
from thee, nor can I endure without thee an hour." He said, "I
hear and I obey," and mounting, rode to the shop of the
Shaykh, the grocer, who welcomed him and rose to him and
embracing him said to him, "How hast thou fared with yonder
idolatress?" He replied, "I was well in health and happiness
till this last night," and told him what had passed in the
garden with the black bird.[FN#342] Now when the old man heard
his words, he said, "Beware of her, for know that the birds
upon the tree were all young men and strangers, whom she loved
and enchanted and turned into birds. That black bird thou
sawest was one of her Mamelukes whom she loved with exceeding
love, till he cast his eyes upon one of her women, wherefore
she changed him into a black bird";--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when Badr Basim acquainted the old grocer with all the doings
of Queen Lab and what he had seen of her proceedings, the
Shaykh gave him to know that all the birds upon the tree were
young men and strangers whom she had enchanted, and that the
black bird was one of her Mamelukes whom she had transmewed.
"And," continued the Shaykh, "whenas she lusteth after him she
transformeth herself into a she-bird that he may enjoy her,
for she still loveth him with passionate love. When she found
that thou knewest of her case, she plotted evil against thee,
for she loveth thee not wholly. But no harm shall betide thee
from her, so long as I protect thee; therefore fear nothing;
for I am a Moslem, by name Abdallah, and there is none in my
day more magical than I; yet do I not make use of gramarye
save upon constraint. Many a time have I put to naught the
sorceries of yonder accursed and delivered folk from her, and
I care not for her, because she can do me no hurt: nay, she
feareth me with exceeding fear, as do all in the city who,
like her, are magicians and serve the fire, not the Omnipotent
Sire. So to-morrow, come thou to me and tell me what she doth
with thee; for this very night she will cast about to destroy
thee, and I will tell thee how thou shalt do with her, that
thou mayst save thyself from her malice." Then King Badr Basim
farewelled the Shaykh and returned to the Queen whom he found
awaiting him. When she saw him, she rose and seating him and
welcoming him brought him meat and drink and the two ate till
they had enough and washed their hands; after which she called
for wine and they drank till the night was well nigh half
spent, when she plied him with cup after cup till he was
drunken and lost sense[FN#343] and wit. When she saw him thus,
she said to him, "I conjure thee by Allah and by whatso thou
worshippest, if I ask thee a question wilt thou inform me
rightly and answer me truly?" And he being drunken, answered,
"Yes, O my lady." Quoth she, "O my lord and light of mine
eyes, when thou awokest last night and foundest me not, thou
soughtest me, till thou sawest me in the garden under the
guise of a white she-bird, and also thou sawest the black bird
leap on me and tread me. Now I will tell the truth of this
matter. That black bird was one of my Mamelukes, whom I loved
with exceeding love; but one day he cast his eyes upon a
certain of my slave-girls, wherefore jealousy gat hold upon me
and I transformed him by my spells into a black bird and her I
slew. But now I cannot endure without him a single hour, so,
whenever I lust after him, I change myself into a she- bird
and go to him, that he may leap me and enjoy me, even as thou
hast seen. Art thou not therefore incensed against me, because
of this, albeit by the virtue of Fire and Light, Shade and
Heat, I love thee more than ever and have made thee my portion
of the world?" He answered (being drunken), "Thy conjecture of
the cause of my rage is correct, and it had no reason other
than this." With this she embraced him and kissed him and made
great show of love to him; then she lay down to sleep and he
by her side Presently about midnight she rose from the carpet-
bed and King Badr Basim was awake; but he feigned sleep and
watched stealthily to see what she would do. She took out of a
red bag a something red, which she planted a-middlemost the
chamber, and it became a stream, running like the sea; after
which she took a handful of barley and strewing it on the
ground, watered it with water from the river; whereupon it
became wheat in the ear, and she gathered it and ground it
into flour. Then she set it aside and returning to bed, lay
down by Badr Basim till morning when he arose and washed his
face and asked her leave to visit the Shaykh his uncle. She
gave him permission and he repaired to Abdallah and told him
what had passed. The old man laughed and said, "By Allah, this
miscreant witch plotteth mischief against thee; but reck thou
not of her ever!" Then he gave him a pound of parched
corn[FN#344] and said to him, "Take this with thee and know
that, when she seeth it, she will ask thee, 'What is this and
what wilt thou do with it?' Do thou answer, 'Abundance of good
things is good'; and eat of it. Then will she bring forth to
thee parched grain of her own and say to thee, 'Eat of this
Sawik; and do thou feign to her that thou eatest thereof, but
eat of this instead, and beware and have a care lest thou eat
of hers even a grain; for, an thou eat so much as a grain
thereof, her spells will have power over thee and she will
enchant thee and say to thee, 'Leave this form of a man.'
Whereupon thou wilt quit thine own shape for what shape she
will. But, an thou eat not thereof, her enchantments will be
null and void and no harm will betide thee therefrom; whereat
she will be shamed with shame exceeding and say to thee, 'I
did but jest with thee!' Then will she make a show of love and
fondness to thee; but this will all be but hypocrisy in her
and craft. And do thou also make a show of love to her and say
to her, 'O my lady and light of mine eyes, eat of this parched
barley and see how delicious it is.' And if she eat thereof,
though it be but a grain, take water in thy hand and throw it
in her face, saying, 'Quit this human form' (for what form
soever thou wilt have her take). Then leave her and come to me
and I will counsel thee what to do." So Badr Basim took leave
of him and returning to the palace, went in to the Queen, who
said to him, "Welcome and well come and good cheer to thee!"
And she rose and kissed him, saying, "Thou hast tarried long
from me, O my lord." He replied, "I have been with my uncle,
and he gave me to eat of this Sawik." Quoth she, "We have
better than that." Then she laid his parched Sawik in one
plate and hers in another and said to him, "Eat of this, for
'tis better than thine." So he feigned to eat of it and when
she thought he had done so, she took water in her hand and
sprinkled him therewith, saying, "Quit this form, O thou
gallows- bird, thou miserable, and take that of a mule one-
eyed and foul of favour." But he changed not; which when she
saw, she arose and went up to him and kissed him between the
eyes, saying, "O my beloved, I did but jest with thee; bear me
no malice because of this." Quoth he, "O my lady, I bear thee
no whit of malice; nay, I am assured that thou lovest me: but
eat of this my parched barley." So she ate a mouthful of
Abdallah's Sawik; but no sooner had it settled in her stomach
than she was convulsed; and King Badr Basim took water in his
palm and threw it in her face, saying, "Quit this human form
and take that of a dapple mule." No sooner had he spoken than
she found herself changed into a she-mule, whereupon the tears
rolled down her cheeks and she fell to rubbing her muzzle
against his feet. Then he would have bridled her, but she
would not take the bit; so he left her and, going to the
grocer, told him what had passed. Abdallah brought out for him
a bridle and bade him rein her forthwith. So he took it to the
palace, and when she saw him, she came up to him and he set
the bit in her mouth and mounting her, rode forth to find the
Shaykh. But when the old man saw her, he rose and said to her,
"Almighty Allah confound thee, O accursed woman!" Then quoth
he to Badr, "O my son, there is no more tarrying for thee in
this city; so ride her and fare with her whither thou wilt and
beware lest thou commit the bridle[FN#345] to any." King Badr
thanked him and farewelling him, fared on three days, without
ceasing, till he drew near another city and there met him an
old man, gray headed and comely, who said to him, "Whence
comest thou, O my son?" Badr replied, "From the city of this
witch"; and the old man said, "Thou art my guest to-night." He
consented and went with him; but by the way behold, they met
an old woman, who wept when she saw the mule, and said, "There
is no god but the God! Verily, this mule resembleth my son's
she-mule, which is dead, and my heart acheth for her; so,
Allah upon thee, O my lord, do thou sell her to me!" He
replied, "By Allah, O my mother, I cannot sell her." But she
cried, "Allah upon thee, do not refuse my request, for my son
will surely be a dead man except I buy him this mule." And she
importuned him, till he exclaimed, "I will not sell her save
for a thousand dinars," saying in himself, "Whence should this
old woman get a thousand gold pieces?" Thereupon she brought
out from her girdle a purse containing a thousand ducats,
which when King Badr Basim saw, he said, "O my mother, I did
but jest with thee; I cannot sell her." But the old man looked
at him and said, "O my son, in this city none may lie, for
whoso lieth they put to death." So King Badr Basim lighted
down from the mule.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Badr Basim dismounted from and delivered the mule to the old
woman, she drew the bit from her mouth and, taking water in
her hand, sprinkled the mule therewith, saying, "O my
daughter, quit this shape for that form wherein thou wast
aforetime!" Upon this she was straightway restored to her
original semblance and the two women embraced and kissed each
other. So King Badr Basim knew that the old woman was Queen
Lab's mother and that he had been tricked and would have fled;
when, lo! the old woman whistled a loud whistle and her call
was obeyed by an Ifrit as he were a great mountain, whereat
Badr was affrighted and stood still. Then the old woman
mounted on the Ifrit's back, taking her daughter behind her
and King Badr Basim before her, and the Ifrit flew off with
them; nor was it a full hour ere they were in the palace of
Queen Lab, who sat down on the throne of kingship and said to
Badr, "Gallows-bird that thou art, now am I come hither and
have attained to that I desired and soon will I show thee how
I will do with thee and with yonder old man the grocer! How
many favours have I shown him! Yet he cloth me frowardness;
for thou hast not attained thine end but by means of him."
Then she took water and sprinkled him therewith, saying, "Quit
the shape wherein thou art for the form of a foul-favoured
fowl, the foulest of all fowls"; and she set him in a cage and
cut off from him meat and drink; but one of her women seeing
this cruelty, took compassion on him and gave him food and
water without her knowledge. One day, the damsel took her
mistress at unawares and going forth the palace, repaired to
the old grocer, to whom she told the whole case, saying,
"Queen Lab is minded to make an end of thy brother's son." The
Shaykh thanked her and said, "There is no help but that I take
the city from her and make thee Queen thereof in her stead."
Then he whistled a loud whistle and there came forth to him an
Ifrit with four wings, to whom he said, "Take up this damsel
and carry her to the city of Julnar the Sea-born and her
mother Farashah[FN#346] for they twain are the most powerful
magicians on face of earth." And he said to the damsel, "When
thou comest thither, tell them that King Badr Basim is Queen
Lab's captive." Then the Ifrit took up his load and, flying
off with her, in a little while set her down upon the terrace
roof of Queen Julnar's palace. So she descended and going in
to the Queen, kissed the earth and told her what had passed to
her son, first and last, whereupon Julnar rose to her and
entreated her with honour and thanked her. Then she let beat
the drums in the city and acquainted her lieges and the lords
of her realm with the good news that King Badr Basim was found
after which she and her mother Farashah and her brother Salih
assembled all the tribes of the Jinn and the troops of the
main; for the Kings of the Jinn obeyed them since the taking
of King Al-Samandal. Presently they all flew up into the air
and lighting down on the city of the sorceress, sacked the
town and the palace and slew all the Unbelievers therein in
the twinkling of an eye. Then said Julnar to the damsel,
"Where is my son?" And the slave girl brought her the cage and
signing to the bird within, cried, "This is thy son." So
Julnar took him forth of the cage and sprinkled him with
water, saying, "Quit this shape for the form wherein thou wast
aforetime;" nor had she made an end of her speech ere he shook
and became a man as before: whereupon his mother, seeing him
restored to human shape, embraced him and he wept with sore
weeping. On like wise did his uncle Salih and his grandmother
and the daughters of his uncle and fell to kissing his hands
and feet. Then Julnar sent for Shaykh Abdallah and thanking
him for his kind dealing with her son, married him to the
damsel, whom he had despatched to her with news of him, and
made him King of the city. Moreover, she summoned those who
survived of the citizens (and they were Moslems), and made
them swear fealty to him and take the oath of loyalty, whereto
they replied, "Hearkening and obedience!" Then she and her
company farewelled him and returned to their own capital. The
townsfolk came out to meet them, with drums beating, and
decorated the place three days and held high festival, of the
greatness of their joy for the return of their King Badr
Basim. After this Badr said to his mother, "O my mother,
naught remains but that I marry and we be all united." She
replied, "Right is thy rede, O my son, but wait till we ask
who befitteth thee among the daughters of the Kings." And his
grandmother Farashah, and the daughters of both his uncles
said, "O Badr Basim, we will help thee to win thy wish
forthright." Then each of them arose and fared forth questing
in the lands, whilst Julnar sent out her waiting women on the
necks of Ifrits, bidding them leave not a city nor a King's
palace without noting all the handsome girls that were
therein. But, when King Badr Basim saw the trouble they were
taking in this matter, he said to Julnar, "O my mother, leave
this thing, for none will content me save Jauharah, daughter
of King Al-Samandal; for that she is indeed a jewel,[FN#347]
according to her name." Replied Julnar, "I know that which
thou seekest;" and bade forthright bring Al-Samandal the King.
As soon as he was present, she sent for Badr Basim and
acquainted him with the King's coming, whereupon he went in to
him. Now when Al-Samandal was aware of his presence, he rose
to him and saluted him and bade him welcome; and King Badr
Basim demanded of him his daughter Jauharah in marriage. Quoth
he, "She is thine handmaid and at thy service and
disposition," and despatched some of his suite bidding them
seek her abode and, after telling her that her sire was in the
hands of King Badr Basim, to bring her forthright. So they
flew up into the air and disappeared and they returned after a
while, with the Princess who, as soon as she saw her father,
went up to him and threw her arms round his neck. Then looking
at her he said, "O my daughter, know that I have given thee in
wedlock to this magnanimous Sovran, and valiant lion King Badr
Basim, son of Queen Julnar the Sea-born, for that he is the
goodliest of the folk of his day and most powerful and the
most exalted of them in degree and the noblest in rank; he
befitteth none but thee and thou none but him." Answered she,
"I may not gainsay thee, O my sire do as thou wilt, for indeed
chagrin and despite are at an end, and I am one of his
handmaids." So they summoned the Kazi and the witnesses who
drew up the marriage contract between King Badr Basim and the
Princess Jauharah, and the citizens decorated the city and
beat the drums of rejoicing, and they released all who were in
the jails, whilst the King clothed the widows and the orphans
and bestowed robes of honour upon the Lords of the Realm and
Emirs and Grandees: and they made bride-feasts and held high
festival night and morn ten days, at the end of which time
they displayed the bride, in nine different dresses, before
King Badr Basim who bestowed an honourable robe upon King Al-
Samandal and sent him back to his country and people and
kinsfolk. And they ceased not from living the most delectable
of life and the most solaceful of days, eating and drinking
and enjoying every luxury, till there came to them the
Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of Societies; and this
is the end of their story[FN#348], may Allah have mercy on
them all! Moreover, O auspicious King, a tale is also told
anent





               KING MOHAMMED BIN SABAIK AND THE
                       MERCHANT HASAN.



There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long
gone before, a King of the Kings of the Persians, by name
Mohammed bin Sabaik, who ruled over Khorasan-land and used
every year to go on razzia into the countries of the
Miscreants in Hind and Sind and China and the lands of
Mawarannahr beyond the Oxus and other regions of the
barbarians and what not else. He was a just King, a valiant
and a generous, and loved table-talk[FN#349] and tales and
verses and anecdotes and histories and entertaining stories
and legends of the ancients. Whoso knew a rare recital and
related it to him in such fashion as to please him he would
bestow on him a sumptuous robe of honour and clothe him from
head to foot and give him a thousand dinars, and mount him on
a horse saddled and bridled besides other great gifts; and the
man would take all this and wend his way. Now it chanced that
one day there came an old man before him and related to him a
rare story, which pleased the King and made him marvel, so he
ordered him a magnificent present, amongst other things a
thousand dinars of Khorasan and a horse with its housings and
trappings. After this, the bruit of the King's munificence was
blazed abroad in all countries and there heard of him a man,
Hasan the Merchant hight, who was a generous, open-handed and
learned, a scholar and an accomplished poet. Now the King had
an envious Wazir, a multum-in-parvo of ill, loving no man,
rich nor poor, and whoso came before the King and he gave him
aught he envied him and said, "Verily, this fashion
annihilateth wealth and ruineth the land; and such is the
custom of the King." But this was naught save envy and despite
in that Minister. Presently the King heard talk of Hasan the
Merchant and sending for him, said to him as soon as he came
into the presence, "O Merchant Hasan, this Wazir of mine
vexeth and thwarteth me concerning the money I give to poets
and boon-companions and story-tellers and glee-men, and I
would have thee tell me a goodly history and a rare story,
such as I have never before heard. An it please me, I will
give thee lands galore, with their forts, in free tenure, in
addition to thy fiefs and untaxed lands; besides which I will
put my whole kingdom in thy hands and make thee my Chief
Wazir; so shalt thy sit on my right hand and rule my subjects.
But an thou bring me not that which I bid thee, I will take
all that is thy hand and banish thee my realm." Replied Hasan,
"Hearkening and obedience to our lord the King! But thy slave
beseecheth thee to have patience with him a year; then will he
tell thee a tale, such as thou hast never in thy life heard,
neither hath other than thou heard its like, not to say a
better than it." Quoth the King, "I grant thee a whole year's
delay." And he called for a costly robe of honour wherein he
robed Hasan, saying, "Keep thy house and mount not horse,
neither go nor come for a year's time, till thou bring me that
I seek of thee. An thou bring it, especial favour awaiteth
thee and thou mayst count upon that which I have promised
thee; but an thou bring it not, thou art not of us nor are we
of thee."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
King Mohammed son of Sabaik said to Hasan the Merchant, "An
thou bring me that I seek of thee, especial favour awaiteth
thee and thou mayest now rejoice in that which I have promised
thee; but, an thou bring it not, thou art not of us nor are we
of thee." Hasan kissed ground before the King and went out
from the presence. Then he chose five of the best of his
Mamelukes, who could all write and read and were learned,
intelligent, accomplished; and he gave each of them five
thousand dinars, saying, "I reared you not save for the like
of this day; so do ye help me to further the King's desire and
deliver me from his hand." Quoth they, "What wilt thou have us
do? Our lives be thy ransom!" Quoth he, "I wish you to go each
to a different country and seek out diligently the learned and
erudite and literate and the tellers of wondrous stories and
marvellous histories and do your endeavour to procure me the
story of Sayf al-Muluk. If ye find it with any one, pay him
what price soever he asketh for it although he demand a
thousand dinars; give him what ye may and promise him the rest
and bring me the story; for whoso happeneth on it and bringeth
it to me, I will bestow on him a costly robe of honour and
largesse galore, and there shall be to me none more worshipped
than he." Then said he to one of them, "Hie thou to Al-Hind
and Al-Sind and all their provinces and dependencies." To
another, "Hie thou to the home of the Persians and to China
and her climates." To the third, "Hie thou to the land of
Khorasan with its districts." To the fourth, "Hie thou to
Mauritania and all its regions, districts, provinces and
quarters." And to the fifth, "Hie thou to Syria and Egypt and
their outliers." Moreover, he chose them out an auspicious day
and said to them, "Fare ye forth this day and be diligent in
the accomplishment of my need and be not slothful, though the
case cost you your lives." So they farewelled him and
departed, each taking the direction perscribed to him. Now,
four of them were absent four months, and searched but found
nothing; so they returned and told their master, whose breast
was straitened, that they had ransacked towns and cities and
countries for the thing he sought, but had happened upon
naught thereof. Meanwhile, the fifth servant journeyed till he
came to the land of Syria and entered Damascus, which he found
a pleasant city and a secure, abounding in trees and rills,
leas and fruiteries and birds chanting the praises of Allah
the One, the All-powerful of sway, Creator of Night and Day.
Here he tarried some time, asking for his master's desire, but
non answered him, wherefore he was on the point of departing
thence to another place, when he met a young man running and
stumbling over his skirts. So he asked of him, "Wherefore
runnest thou in such eagerness and whither dost thou press?"
And he answered, "There is an elder here, a man of learning,
who every day at this time taketh his seat on a stool[FN#350]
and relateth tales and stories and delectable anecdotes,
whereof never heard any the like; and I am running to get me a
place near him and fear I shall find no room, because of the
much folk." Quoth the Mameluke, "Take me with thee;" and quoth
the youth, "Make haste in thy walking." So he shut his door
and hastened with him to the place of recitation, where he saw
an old man of bright favour seated on a stool holding forth to
the folk. He sat down near him and addressed himself to hear
his story, till the going down of the sun, when the old man
made an end of his tale and the people, having heard it all,
dispersed from about him; whereupon the Mameluke accosted him
and saluted him, and he returned his salam and greeted him
with the utmost worship and courtesy. Then said the messenger
to him, "O my lord Shaykh, thou art a comely and reverend man,
and thy discourse is goodly; but I would fain ask thee of
somewhat." Replied the old man, "Ask of what thou wilt!" Then
said the Mameluke, "Hast thou the story of Sayf al-Muluk and
Badi'a al-Jamal?" Rejoined the elder, "And who told thee of
this story and informed thee thereof?" Answered the messenger,
"None told me of it, but I am come from a far country, in
quest of this tale, and I will pay thee whatever thou askest
for its price if thou have it and wilt, of thy bounty and
charity, impart it to me and make it an alms to me, of the
generosity of thy nature for, had I my life in my hand and
lavished it upon thee for this thing, yet were it pleasing to
my heart." Replied the old man, "Be of good cheer and keep
thine eye cool and clear: thou shalt have it; but this is no
story that one telleth in the beaten highway, nor do I give it
to every one." Cried the other, "By Allah, O my lord, do not
grudge it me, but ask of me what price thou wilt." And the old
man, "If thou wish for the history give me an hundred dinars
and thou shalt have it; but upon five conditions." Now when
the Mameluke knew that the old man had the story and was
willing to sell it to him, he joyed with exceeding joy and
said, "I will give thee the hundred dinars by way of price and
ten to boot as a gratuity and take it on the conditions of
which thou speakest." Said the old man, "Then go and fetch the
gold pieces, and take that thou seekest." So the messenger
kissed his hands and joyful and happy returned to his lodging,
where he laid an hundred and ten dinars[FN#351] in a purse he
had by him. As soon as morning morrowed, he donned his clothes
and taking the dinars, repaired to the story-teller, whom he
found seated at the door of his house. So he saluted him and
the other returned his salam. Then he gave him the gold and
the old man took it and carrying the messenger into his house
made him sit down in a convenient place, when he set before
him ink-case and reed-pen and paper and giving him a book,
said to him, "Write out what thou seekest of the
night-story[FN#352] of Sayf al-Muluk from this book."
Accordingly the Mameluke fell to work and wrote till he had
made an end of his copy, when he read it to the old man, and
he corrected it and presently said to him, "Know, O my son,
that my five conditions are as follows; firstly, that thou
tell not this story in the beaten high road nor before women
and slave-girls nor to black slaves nor feather-heads; nor
again to boys; but read it only before Kings and Emirs and
Wazirs and men of learning, such as expounders of the Koran
and others." Thereupon the messenger accepted the conditions
and kissing the old man'shand, took leave of him, and fared
forth.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when the Mameluke of Hasan the Merchant had copied the tale
out of the book belonging to the old man of Damascus, and had
accepted his conditions and farewelled him, he fared forth on
the same day, glad and joyful, and journeyed on diligently, of
the excess of his contentment, for that he had gotten the
story of Sayf al-Muluk, till he came to his own country, when
he despatched his servant to bear the good news to his master
and say to him, "Thy Mameluke is come back in safety and hath
won his will and his aim." (Now of the term appointed between
Hasan and the King there wanted but ten days.) Then, after
taking rest in his own quarters he himself went in to the
Merchant and told him all that had befallen him and gave him
the book containing the story of Sayf al-Muluk and Badi'a
al-Jamal, when Hasan joyed with exceeding joy at the sight and
bestowed on him all the clothes he had on and gave him ten
thoroughbred horses and the like number of camels and mules
and three negro chattels and two white slaves. Then Hasan took
the book and copied out the story plainly in his own hand;
after which he presented himself before the King and said to
him, "O thou auspicious King, I have brought thee a
night-story and a rarely pleasant relation, whose like none
ever heard at all." When these words reached the King's ear,
he sent forthright for all the Emirs, who were men of
understanding, and all the learned doctors and folk of
erudition and culture and poets and wits; and Hasan sat down
and read the history before the King, who marvelled thereat
and approved it, as did all who were present, and they
showered gold and silver and jewels upon the Merchant.
Moreover, the King bestowed on him a costly robe of honour of
the richest of his raiment and gave him a great city with its
castles and outliers; and he appointed him one of his Chief
Wazirs and seated him on his right hand. Then he caused the
scribes write the story in letters of gold and lay it up in
his privy treasures: and whenever his breast was straitened,
he would summon Hasan and he would read him the story,[FN#353]
which was as follows:--




Story of Prince Sayf al-Muluk and the Princess Badi'a al-Jamal.



There was once, in days of old and in ages and times long
told, a King in Egypt called Asim bin Safwan,[FN#354] who was
a liberal and beneficent sovran, venerable and majestic. He
owned many cities and sconces and fortresses and troops and
warriors and had a Wazir named Faris bin Salih,[FN#355] and he
and all his subjects worshipped the sun and the fire, instead
of the All-powerful Sire, the Glorious, the Victorious. Now
this King was become a very old man, weakened and wasted with
age and sickness and decrepitude; for he had lived an hundred
and fourscore years and had no child, male or female, by
reason whereof he was ever in cark and care from morning to
night and from night to morn. It so happened that one day of
the days, he was sitting on the throne of his Kingship, with
his Emirs and Wazirs and Captains and Grandees in attendance
on him, according to their custom, in their several stations,
and whenever there came in an Emir, who had with him a son or
two sons, or haply three who stood at the sides of their sires
the King envied him and said in himself, "Every one of these
is happy and rejoiceth in his children, whilst I, I have no
child, and to-morrow I die and leave my reign and throne and
lands and hoards, and strangers will take them and none will
bear me in memory nor will there remain any mention of me in
the world." Then he became drowned in the sea of thought and
for the much thronging of griefs and anxieties upon his hear,
like travellers faring for the well, he shed tears and
descending from his throne, sat down upon the floor,[FN#356]
weeping and humbling himself before the Lord. Now when the
Wazir and notables of the realm and others who were present in
the assembly saw him do thus with his royal person, they
feared for their lives and let the poursuivants cry aloud to
the lieges, saying, "Hie ye to your homes and rest till the
King recover from what aileth him." So they went away, leaving
none in the presence save the Minister who, as soon as the
King came to himself, kissed ground between his hands and
said, "O King of the Age and the Time, wherefore this weeping
and wailing? Tell me who hath transgressed against thee of the
Kings or Castellans or Emirs or Grandees, and inform me who
hath thwarted thee, O my liege lord, that we may all fall on
him and tear his soul from his two sides." But he spake not
neither raised his head; whereupon the Minister kissed ground
before him a second time and said to him, "O Master,[FN#357] I
am even as thy son and thy slave, nay, I have reared thee; yet
know I not the cause of thy cark and chagrin and of this thy
case; and who should know but I who should stand in my stead
between thy hands? Tell me therefore why this weeping and
wherefore thine affliction." Nevertheless, the King neither
opened his mouth nor raised his head, but ceased not to weep
and cry with a loud crying and lament with exceeding
lamentation and ejaculate, "Alas!" The Wazir took patience
with him awhile, after which he said to him, "Except thou tell
me the cause of this thine affliction, I will set this sword
to my heart and will slay myself before thine eyes, rather
than see thee thus distressed." Then King Asim raised his head
and, wiping away his tears, said, "O Minister of good counself
and experience, leave me to my care and my chagrin, for that
which is in my heart of sorrow sufficeth me." But Faris said,
"Tell me, O King, the cause of this thy weeping, haply Allah
will appoint thee relief at my hands."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir said to King Asim, "Tell me the cause of this thy
weeping: haply Allah shall appoint thee relief at my hands."
Replied the King, "O Wazir, I weep not for monies nor horses
nor kingdoms nor aught else, but that I am become an old man,
yea, very old, nigh upon an hundred and fourscore years of
age, and I have not been blessed with a child, male or female;
so, when I die, they will bury me and my trace will be effaced
and my name cut off; the stranger will take my throne and
reign and none will ever make mention of my being." Rejoined
the Minister Faris, "O King of the Age, I am older than thou
by an hundred years yet have I never been blest with boon of
child and cease not day and night from cark and care and
concern; so how shall we do, I and thou?" Quoth Asim, "O
Wazir, hast thou no device or shift in this matter?" and quoth
the Minister, "Know, O King that I have heard of a Sovran in
the land of Saba[FN#358] by name Solomon David-son (upon the
twain be the Peace!),[FN#359] who pretendeth to prophetship
and avoucheth that he hath a mighty Lord who can do all things
and whose kingdom is in the Heavens and who hath dominion over
all mankind and birds and beasts and over the wind and the
Jinn. Moreover, he kenneth the speech of birds and the
language of every other created thing; and withal, he calleth
all creatures to the worship of his Lord and discourseth to
them of their service. So let us send him a messenger in the
King's name and seek of him our need, beseeching him to put up
prayer to his Lord, that He vouchsafe each of us boon of
issue. If his Faith be soothfast and his Lord Omnipotent, He
will assuredly bless each of us with a child male or female,
and if the thing thus fall out, we will enter his faith and
worship his Lord; else will we take patience and devise us
another device." The King cried, "This is well seen, and my
breast is braodened by this thy speech; but where shall we
find a messenger befitting this grave matter, for that this
Solomon is no Kinglet and the approaching him is no light
affair? Indeed, I will send him none, on the like of this
matter, save thyself; for thou art ancient and versed in all
manner affairs and the like of thee is the like of myself;
wherefore I desire that thou weary thyself and journey to him
and occupy thyself sedulously with accomplishing this matter,
so haply solace may be at thy hand." The Minister said, "I
hear and I obey; but rise thou forthwith and seat thee upon
the throne, so the Emirs and Lords of the realm and officers
and the lieges may enter applying themselves to thy service,
according to their custom; for they all went away from thee,
troubled at heart on thine account. Then will I go out and set
forth on the Sovran's errand." So the King arose forthright
and sat down on the throne of his kingship, whilst the Wazir
went out and said to the Chamberlain, "Bid the folk proceed to
their service, as of their wont." Accordingly the troops and
Captains and Lords of the land entered, after they had spread
the tables and ate and drank and withdrew as was their wont,
after which the Wazir Faris went forth from King Asim and,
repairing to his own house, equipped himself for travel and
returned to the King, who opened to him the treasuries and
provided him with rarities and things of price and rich stuffs
and gear without compare, such as nor Emir nor Wazir hath
power to possess. Moreover, King Asim charged him to accost
Solomon with reverence, foregoing him with the salam, but not
exceeding in speech; "and (continued he) then do thou ask of
him thy need, and if he say 'tis granted, return to us in
haste, for I shall be awaiting thee." Accordingly, the
Minister kissed hands and took the presents and setting out,
fared on night and day, till he came within fifteen days'
journey of Saba. Meanwhile Allah (extolled and exalted be He!)
inspired Solomon the son of David (the Peace be upon both!)
and said to him, "O Solomon, the King of Egypt sendeth unto
thee his Chief Wazir, with a present of rarities and such and
such things of price; so do thou also despatch thy Counsellor
Asaf bin Barkhiya to meet him with honour and with victual at
the halting-places; and when he cometh to thy presence, say
unto him, 'Verily, thy King hath sent thee in quest of this
and that and thy business is thus and thus.' Then do