 thou
propound to him The Saving Faith."[FN#360] Whereupon Solomon
bade his Wazir make ready a company of his retainers and go
forth to meet the Minister of Egypt with honour and sumptuous
provision at the halting-places. So Asaf made ready all that
was needed for their entertainment and setting out, fared on
till he fell in with Faris and accosted him with the salam,
honouring him and his company with exceeding honour. Moreover,
he brought them provaunt and provender at the halting-places
and said to them, "Well come and welcome and fair welcome to
the coming guests! Rejoice in the certain winning of your
wish! Be your souls of good cheer and your eyes cool and clear
and your breasts be broadened!" Quoth Faris in himself, "Who
acquainted him with this?"; and he said to Asaf,[FN#361] "O my
lord, and who gave thee to know of us and our need?" "It was
Solomon son of David (on whom be the Peace!), told us of
this!" "And who told our lord Solomon?" "The Lord of the
heaven and the earth told him, the God of all creatures!"
"This is none other than a mighty God!" "And do ye not worship
him?" "We worship the Sun, and prostrate ourselves thereto."
"O Wazir Faris, the sun is but a star of the stars created by
Allah (extolled and exalted be He!), and Allah forbid that it
should be a Lord! Because whiles it riseth and whiles it
setteth, but our Lord is ever present and never absent and He
over all things is Omnipotent!" Then they journeyed on a
little while till they came to the land Saba and drew near the
throne of Solomon David-son, (upon the twain be peace!), who
commanded his hosts of men and Jinn and others[FN#362] to form
line on their road. So the beasts of the sea and the elephants
and leopards and lynxes and all beasts of the land ranged
themselves in espalier on either side of the way, after their
several kinds, and similarly the Jinn drew out in two ranks,
appearing all to mortal eyes without concealment, in divers
forms grisly and gruesome. So they lined the road on either
hand, and the birds bespread their wings over the host of
creatures to shade them, warbling one to other in all manner
of voices and tongues. Now when the people of Egypt came to
this terrible array, they dreaded it and durst not proceed;
but Asaf said to them, "Pass on amidst them and walk forward
and fear them not: for they are slaves of Solomon son of
David, and none of them will harm you." So saying, he entered
between the ranks, followed by all the folk and amongst them
the Wazir of Egypt and his company, fearful: and they ceased
not faring forwards till they reached the city, where they
lodged the embassy in the guest-house and for the space of
three days entertained them sumptuously, entreating them with
the utmost honour. Then they carried them before Solomon,
prophet of Allah (on whom be the Peace!), and when entering
they would have kissed the earth before him; but he forbade
them, saying, "It befitteth not a man prostrate himself to
earth save before Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!),
Creator of Earth and Heaven and all other things; wherefore,
whosoever of you hath a mint to sit let him be seated in my
service, or to stand, let him stand, but let none stand to do
me worship." So they obeyed him and the Wazir Faris and some
of his intimates sat down, whilst certain of the lesser sort
remained afoot to wait on him. When they had sat awhile, the
servants spread the tables and they all, men and beasts, ate
their sufficiency.[FN#363] Then Solomon bade Faris expound his
errand, that it might be accomplished, saying, "Speak and hide
naught of that wherefor thou art come; for I know why ye come
and what is your errand, which is thus and thus. The King of
Egypt who despatched thee, Asim hight, hath become a very old
man, infirm, decrepit; and Allah (whose name be exalted!) hath
not blessed him with offspring, male or female. So he abode in
cark and care and chagrin from morn to night and from night to
morn. It so happened that one day of the days as he sat upon
the throne of his kingship with his Emirs and Wazirs, and
Captains and Grandees in attendance on him, he saw some of
them with two sons, others with one, and others even three,
who came with their sires to do him service. So he said in
himself, of the excess of his sorrow, 'Who shall get my
kingdom after my death? Will any save a stranger take it? And
thus shall I pass out of being as though I had never been!' On
this account he became drowned in the sea of thought, until
his eyes were flooded with tears and he covered his face with
his kerchief and wept with sore weeping. Then he rose from off
his throne and sat down upon the floor wailing and lamenting
and none knew what was in heart as he grovelled in the ground
save Allah Almighty."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Solomon David-son (upon both of whom be peace!) after
disclosing to the Wazir Faris that which had passed between
himself and his master, King Asim, said to him, "Is this that
I have told thee the truth, O Wazir?" Replied Faris, "O
prophet of Allah, this thou hast said is indeed sooth and
verity; but when we discoursed of this matter, none was with
the King and myself, nor was any ware of our case; who, then
told thee of all these things?" Answered Solomon, "They were
told to me by my Lord who knoweth whatso is concealed[FN#364]
from the eye and what is hidden in the breasts." Quoth Faris,
"O Prophet of Allah, verily this is none other than a mighty
Lord and an omnipotent God!" And he Islamized with all his
many. Then said Solomon to him, "Thou hast with thee such and
such presents and rarities;" and Faris replied "Yes." The
prophet continued, "I accept them all and give them in free
gift unto thee. So do ye rest, thou and thy company, in the
place where you have been lodging, till the fatigue of the
journey shall cease from you; and to-morrow, Inshallah! thine
errand shall be accomplished to the uttermost, if it be the
will of Allah the Most High, Lord of heaven and earth and the
light which followeth the gloom; Creator of all creatures." So
Faris returned to his quarters and passed the night in deep
thought. But when morning morrowed he presented himself before
the Lord Solomon, who said to him, "When thou returnest to
King Asim bin Safwan and you twain are re-united, do ye both
go forth some day armed with bow, bolts and brand, and fare to
such a place, where ye shall find a certain tree. Mount upon
it and sit silent until the midhour between noon-prayer and
that of mid-afternoon, when the noontide heat hath cooled;
then descend and look at the foot of the tree, whence ye will
see two serpents come forth, one with a head like an ape's and
the other with a head like an Ifrit's. Shoot them ye twain
with bolts and kill them both; then cut off a span's length
from their heads and the like from their tails and throw it
away. The rest of the flesh cook and cook well and give it to
your wives to eat: then lie with them that night and, by
Allah's leave, they shall conceive and bear male children."
Moreover, he gave him a seal-ring, a sword, and a wrapper
containing two tunics[FN#365] embroidered with gold and
jewels, saying, "O Wazir Faris, when your sons grow up to
man's estate, give to each of them one of these tunics." Then
said he, "In the name of Allah! May the Almighty accomplish
your desire! And now nothing remaineth for thee but to depart,
relying on the blessing of the Lord the Most High, for the
King looketh for thy return night and day and his eye is ever
gazing on the road." So the Wazir advanced to the prophet
Solomon son of David (upon both of whom be the Peace!) and
farewelled him and fared forth from him after kissing his
hands. Rejoicing in the accomplishment of his errand he
travelled on with all diligence night and day, and ceased not
wayfaring till he drew near to Cairo, when he despatched one
of his servants to acquaint King Asim with his approach and
the successful issue of his journey; which when the King heard
he joyed with exceeding joy, he and his Grandees and Officers
and troops especially in the Wazir's safe return. When they
met, the Minister dismounted and, kissing ground before the
King, gave him the glad news anent the winning of his wish in
fullest fashion; after which he expounded the True Faith to
him, and the King and all his people embraced Al-Islam with
much joy and gladness. Then said Asim to his Wazir, "Go home
and rest this night and a week to boot; then go to the
Hammambath and come to me, that I may inform thee of what we
shall have to consider." So Faris kissed ground and withdrew,
with his suite, pages and eunuchs, to his house, where he
rested eight days; after which he repaired to the King and
related to him all that had passed between Solomon and
himself, adding, "Do thou rise and go forth with me alone."
Then the King and the Minister took two bows and two bolts and
repairing to the tree indicated by Solomon, clomb up into it
and there sat in silence till the mid-day heat had passed away
and it was near upon the hour of mid-afternoon prayer, when
they descended and looking about them saw a
serpent-couple[FN#366] issue from the roots of the tree. The
King gazed at them, marvelling to see them ringed with collars
of gold about their necks, and said to Faris, "O Wazir, verily
these snakes have golden torques! By Allah, this is forsooth a
rare thing! Let us catch them and set them in a cage and keep
them to look upon." But the Minister said, "These hath Allah
created for profitable use;[FN#367] so do thou shoot one and I
will shoot the other with these our shafts." Accordingly they
shot at them with arrows and slew them; after which they cut
off a span's length of their heads and tails and threw it
away. Then they carried the rest to the King's palace, where
they called the kitchener and giving him the flesh said,
"Dress this meat daintily, with onion-sauce[FN#368] and
spices, and ladle it out into two saucers and bring them
hither at such an hour, without delay!"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
King and the Wazir gave the serpents' flesh to the kitchener,
saying, "Cook it and ladle it out into two saucers and bring
them hither without delay!"; the cook took the meat and went
with it to the kitchen, where he cooked it and dressed it in
skilful fashion with a mighty fine onion-sauce and hot spices;
after which he ladled it out into two saucers and set them
before the King and the Wazir, who took each a dish and gave
their wives to eat of the meat. Then they went in that night
unto them and knew them carnally, and by the good pleasure of
Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) and His all-might and
furtherance, they both conceived on one and the same night.
The King abode three months, troubled in mind and saying in
himself, "I wonder whether this thing will prove true or
untrue"; till one day, as the lady his Queen was sitting, the
child stirred in her womb and she felt a pain and her colour
changed. So she knew that she was with child and calling the
chief of her eunuchs, gave him this command, "Go to the King,
wherever he may be and congratulate him saying, 'O King of the
Age, I bring thee the glad tidings that our lady's pregnancy
is become manifest, for the child stirreth in her womb'." So
the eunuch went out in haste, rejoicing, and finding the King
alone, with cheek on palm, pondering this thing, kissed ground
between his hands and acquainted him with his wife's
pregnancy. When the King heard his words, he sprang to his
feet and in the excess of his joy, he kissed[FN#369] the
eunuch's hands and head and doffing the clothes he had on,
gave them to him. Moreover, he said to those who were present
in his assembly, "Whoso loveth me, let him bestow largesse
upon this man."[FN#370] And they gave him of coin and jewels
and jacinths and horses and mules and estates and gardens what
was beyond count or calculation. At that moment in came the
Wazir Faris and said to Asim, "O my master, but now I was
sitting alone at home and absorbed in thought, pondering the
matter of the pregnancy and saying to myself, 'Would I wot an
this thing be true and whether my wife Khatun[FN#371] have
conceived or not!' when, behold, an eunuch came in to me and
brought me the glad tidings that his lady was indeed pregnant,
for that her colour was changed and the child stirred in her
womb; whereupon, in my joy, I doffed all the clothes I had on
and gave them to him, together with a thousand dinars, and
made him Chief of the Eunuchs." Rejoined the King, "O
Minister, Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) hath, of His
grace and bounty and goodness, and beneficence, made gift to
us of the True Faith and brought us out of night into light,
and hath been bountiful to us, of His favour and benevolence;
wherefore I am minded to solace the folk and cause them to
rejoice." Quoth Faris, "Do what thou wilt,[FN#372]" and quoth
the King, "O Wazir, go down without stay or delay and set free
all who are in the prisons, both criminals and debtors, and
whoso transgresseth after this, we will requite as he
deserveth even to the striking off of his head. Moreover, we
forgive the people three years' taxes, and do thou set up
kitchens all around about the city walls[FN#373] and bid the
kitcheners hang over the fire all kinds of cooking pots and
cook all manner of meats, continuing their cooking night and
day, and let all comers, both of our citizens and of the
neighbouring countries, far and near, eat and drink and carry
to their houses. And do thou command the people to make
holiday and decorate the city seven days and shut not the
taverns night nor day[FN#374]; and if thou delay I will behead
thee[FN#375]!" So he did as the King bade him and the folk
decorated the city and citadel and bulwarks after the
goodliest fashion and, donning their richest attire, passed
their time in feasting and sporting and making merry, till the
days of the Queen's pregnancy were accomplished and she was
taken, one night, with labour pains hard before dawn. Then the
King bade summon all the Olema and astronomers, mathematicians
and men of learning, astrologers, scientists and scribes in
the city, and they assembled and sat awaiting the throwing of
a bead into the cup[FN#376] which was to be the signal to the
Astrophils, as well as to the nurses and attendants, that the
child was born. Presently, as they sat in expectation, the
Queen gave birth to a boy like a slice of the moon when
fullest and the astrologers fell to calculating and noted his
star and nativity and drew his horoscope. Then, on being
summoned they rose and, kissing the earth before the King,
gave him the glad tidings, saying, "In very sooth the new-born
child is of happy augury and born under an auspicious aspect,
but" they added, "in the first of his life there will befall
him a thing which we fear to name before the King." Quoth
Asim, "Speak and fear not;" so quoth they, "O King, this boy
will fare forth from this land and journey in strangerhood and
suffer shipwreck and hardship and prisonment and distress, and
indeed he hath before him the sorest of sufferings; but he
shall free him of them in the end, and win to his wish and
live the happiest of lives the rest of his days, ruling over
subjects with a strong hand and having dominion in the land,
despite enemies and enviers." Now when the King heard the
astrologers' words, he said, "The matter is a mystery; but all
that Allah Almighty hath written for the creature of good and
bad cometh to pass and needs must betide him from this day to
that a thousand solaces." So he paid no heed to their words or
attention to their speeches but bestowed on them robes of
honour, as well upon all who were present, and dismissed them;
when, behold, in came Faris the Wazir and kissed the earth
before the King in huge joy, saying, "Good tidings, O King! My
wife hath but now given birth to a son, as he were a slice of
the moon." Replied Asim, "O Wazir, go, bring thy wife and
child hither, that she may abide with my wife in my palace,
and they shall bring up the two boys together." So Faris
fetched his wife and son and they committed the two children
to the nurses wet and dry. And after seven days had passed
over them, they brought them before the King and said to him,
"What wilt thou name the twain?" Quoth he, "Do ye name them;"
but quoth they, "None nameth the son save his sire." So he
said, "Name my son Sayf al-Muluk, after my grandfather, and
the Minister's son Sa'id[FN#377] Then he bestowed robes of
honour on the nurses wet and dry and said to them, "Be ye
ruthful over them and rear them after the goodliest fashion."
So they brought up the two boys diligently till they reached
the age of five, when the King committed them to a doctor of
Sciences[FN#378] who taught them to read the Koran and write.
When they were ten years old, King Asim gave them in charge to
masters, who instructed them in cavalarice and shooting with
shafts and lunging with lance and play of Polo and the like
till, by the time they were fifteen years old, they were
clever in all manner of martial exercises, nor was there one
to view with them in horsemanship, for each of them would do
battle with a thousand men and make head against them single
handed. So when they came to years of discretion, whenever
King Asim looked on them he joyed in them with exceeding joy;
and when they attained their twenty-fifth year, he took Faris
his Minister apart one day and said to him, "O Wazir, I am
minded to consult with thee concerning a thing I desire to
do." Replied he, "Whatever thou hast a mind to do, do it; for
thy judgment is blessed." Quoth the King, "O Wazir, I am
become a very old and decrepit man, sore stricken in years,
and I desire to take up my abode in an oratory, that I may
worship Allah Almighty and give my kingdom and Sultanate to my
son Sayf al-Muluk for that he is grown a goodly youth, perfect
in knightly exercises and intellectual attainments, polite
letters and gravity, dignity and the art of government. What
sayst thou, O Minister, of this project?" And quoth the
counsellor, "Right indeed is thy rede: the idea is a blessed
and a fortunate, and if thou do this, I will do the like and
my son Sa'id shall be the Prince's Wazir, for he is a comely
young man and complete in knowledge and judgment. Thus will
the two youths be together, and we will order their affair and
neglect not their case, but guide them to goodness and in the
way that is straight." Quoth the King, "Write letters and send
them by couriers to all the countries and cities and sconces
and fortresses that be under our hands, bidding their chiefs
be present on such a day at the Horse-course of the
Elephant."[FN#379] So the Wazir went out without stay or delay
and despatched letters of this purport to all the deputies and
governors of fortresses and others under King Asim; and he
commanded also that all in the city should be present, far and
near, high and low. When the appointed time drew nigh, King
Asim bade the tent-pitchers plant pavilions in the midst of
the Champ-de-Mars and decorate them after the most sumptuous
fashion and set up the great throne whereon he sat not but on
festivals. And they at once did his bidding. Then he and all
his Nabobs and Chamberlains and Emirs sallied forth, and he
commanded proclamation be made to the people, saying, "In the
name of Allah, come forth to the Maydan!" So all the Emirs and
Wazirs and Governors of provinces and Feudatories[FN#380] came
forth to the place of assembly and, entering the royal
pavilion, addressed themselves to the service of the King as
was their wont, and abode in their several stations, some
sitting and others standing, till all the people were gathered
together, when the King bade spread the tables and they ate
and drank and prayed for him. Then he commanded the
Chamberlains[FN#381] to proclaim to the people that they
should not depart: so they made proclamation to them, saying,
"Let none of you fare hence till he have heard the King's
words!" So they withdrew the curtains of the royal pavilion
and the King said, "Whoso loveth me, let him remain till he
have heard my speech!" Whereupon all the folk sat down in mind
tranquil after they had been fearful, saying, "Wherefore have
we been summoned by the King?" Then the Sovran rose to his
feet, and making them swear that none would stir from his
stead, said to them, "O ye Emirs and Wazirs and Lords of the
land; the great and the small of you, and all ye who are
present of the people; say me, wot ye not that this kingdom
was an inheritance to me from my fathers and forefathers?"
Answered they, "Yes, O King we all know that." And he
continued, "I and you, we all worshipped the sun and moon,
till Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) vouchsafed us the
knowledge of the True Faith and brought us out of darkness
unto light, and directed us to the religion of Al-Islam. Know
that I am become a very old man, feeble and decrepit, and I
desire to take up my abode in a hermitage[FN#382] there to
worship Allah Almighty and crave His pardon for past offenses
and make this my son Sayf al-Muluk ruler. Ye know full well
that he is a comely youth, eloquent, liberal, learned, versed
in affairs, intelligent, equitable; wherefore I am minded
presently to resign to him my realm and to make him ruler over
you and seat him as Sultan in my stead, whilst I give myself
to solitude and to the worship of Allah in an oratory, and my
son and heir shall judge between you. What say ye then, all of
you?" Thereupon they all rose and kissing ground before him,
made answer with "Hearing and obedience," saying, "O our King
and our defender an thou should set over us one of thy
blackamoor slaves we would obey him and hearken to thy word
and accept thy command: how much more then with thy son Sayf
al-Muluk? Indeed, we accept of him and approve him on our eyes
and heads!" So King Asim bin Safwan arose and came down from
his seat and seating his son on the great throne,[FN#383] took
the crown from his own head and set it on the head of Sayf
al-Muluk and girt his middle with the royal girdle.[FN#384]
Then he sat down beside his son on the throne of his kingship,
whilst the Emirs and Wazirs and Lords of the land and all the
rest of the folk rose and kissed ground before him, saying,
"Indeed, he is worthy of the kingship and hath better right to
it than any other." Then the Chamberlains made proclamation
crying, "Aman! Aman! Safety! Safety!" and offered up prayers
for his victory and prosperity. And Sayf al-Muluk scattered
gold and silver on the heads of the lieges one and all.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
King Asim seated his son, Sayf al-Muluk, upon the throne and
all the people prayed for his victory and prosperity, the
youth scattered gold and silver on the heads of the lieges,
one and all, and conferred robes of honour and gave gifts and
largesse. Then, after a moment, the Wazir Faris arose and
kissing ground said, "O Emirs, O Grandees, ye ken that I am
Wazir and that my Wazirate dateth from old, before the
accession of King Asim bin Safwan, who hath now divested
himself of the Kingship and made his son King in his stead?"
Answered they, "Yes, we know that thy Wazirate is from sire
after grandsire." He continued, "And now in my turn I divest
myself of office and invest this my son Sa'id, for he is
intelligent, quick-witted, sagacious. What say ye all?" And
they replied, "None is worthy to be Wazir to King Sayf
al-Muluk but thy son, Sa'id, and they befit each other." With
this Faris arose and taking off his Wazirial turband, set it
on his son's head and eke laid his ink-case of office before
him, whilst the Chamberlains and the Emirs said, "Indeed, he
is deserving of the Wazirship" and the Heralds cried aloud,
"Mubarak! Mubarak!--Felix sit et faustus!" After this, King
Asim and Faris the Minister arose and, opening the royal
treasuries, conferred magnificent robes of honour on all the
Viceroys and Emirs and Wazirs and Lords of the land and other
folk and gave salaries and benefactions and wrote them new
mandates and diplomas with the signatures of King Sayf
al-Muluk and his Wazir Sa'id. Moreover, he made distribution
of money to the men-at-arms and gave guerdons, and the
provincials abode in the city a full week ere they departed
each to his own country and place. Then King Asim carried his
son and his Wazir Sa'id back to the palace which was in the
city and bade the treasurer bring the seal-ring and
signet,[FN#385] sword and wrapper; which being done, he said
to the two young men, "O my sons, come hither and let each of
you choose two of these things and take them." The first to
make choice was Sayf al-Muluk, who put out his hand and took
the ring and the wrapper, whilst Sa'id took the sword and the
signet; after which they both kissed the King's hands and went
away to their lodging. Now Sayf al-Muluk opened not the
wrapper to see what was therein, but threw it on the couch
where he and Sa'id slept by night, for it was their habit to
lie together. Presently they spread them the bed and the two
lay down with a pair of wax candles burning over them and
slept till midnight, when Sayf al-Muluk awoke and, seeing the
bundle at his head, said in his mind, "I wonder what thing of
price is in this wrapper my father gave me!" So he took it
together with a candle and descended from the couch leaving
Sa'id sleeping and carried the bundle into a closet, where he
opened it and found within a tunic of the fabric of the Jann.
He spread it out and saw on the lining[FN#386] of the back,
the portraiture wroughten in gold of a girl and marvellous was
her loveliness; and no sooner had he set eyes on the figure
than his reason fled his head and he became Jinn-mad for love
thereof, so that he fell down in a swoon and presently
recovering, began to weep and lament, beating his face and
breast and kissing her. And he recited these verses,

"Love, at the first, is a spurt of spray[FN#387] * Which Doom
     disposes and Fates display;
Till, when deep diveth youth in passion-sea * Unbearable
     sorrows his soul waylay."

And also these two couplets,

"Had I known of Love in what fashion he * Robbeth heart and
     soul I had guarded me:
But of malice prepense I threw self away * Unwitting of Love
     what his nature be."

And Sayf al-Muluk ceased not to weep and wail and beat face
and breast, till Sa'id awoke and missing him from the bed and
seeing but a single candle, said to himself, "Whither is Sayf
al-Muluk gone?" Then he took the other candle and went round
about the palace, till he came upon the closet where he saw
the Prince lying at full length, weeping with sore weeping and
lamenting aloud. So he said to him, "O my brother, for what
cause are these tears and what hath befallen thee? Speak to me
and tell me the reason thereof." But Sayf al-Muluk spoke not
neither raised his head and continued to weep and wail and
beat hand on breast. Seeing him in this case quoth Sa'id, "I
am thy Wazir and thy brother, and we were reared together, I
and thou; so an thou do not unburden thy breast and discover
thy secret to me, to whom shalt thou reveal it and disclose
its cause?" And he went on to humble himself and kiss the
ground before him a full hour, whilst Sayf al-Muluk paid no
heed to him nor answered him a word, but gave not over to
weeping. At last, being affrighted at his case and weary of
striving with him, he went out and fetched a sword, with which
he returned to the closet, and setting the point to his own
breast, said to the Prince, "Rouse thee, O my brother! An thou
tell me not what aileth thee, I will slay myself and see thee
no longer in this case." Whereupon Sayf al-Muluk raised his
head towards the Wazir and answered him, "O my brother, I am
ashamed to tell thee what hath betided me;" but Sa'id said, "I
conjure thee by Allah, Lord of Lords, Liberator of
Necks,[FN#388] Causer of causes, the One, the Ruthful, the
Gift-full, the Bountiful, that thou tell me what aileth thee
and be not abashed at me, for I am thy slave and thy Minister
and counsellor in all thine affairs!" Quoth Sayf al-Muluk,
"Come and look at this likeness." So Sa'id looked at it awhile
and considering it straitly, behold, he saw written, as a
crown over its head, in letters of pearl, these words, "This
is the counterfeit presentment of Badi'a al-Jamal, daughter of
Shahyal bin Sharukh, a King of the Kings of the true-believing
Jann who have taken up their abode in the city of Babel and
sojourn in the garden of Iram, Son of 'Ad the
Greater.'"[FN#389]--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when Sa'id, son of the Wazir Faris, had read to Sayf al-Muluk,
son of King Asim, the writ on the tunic, which showed the
portraiture of Badi'a al-Jamal, daughter of Shahyal bin
Sharukh, a King of the Kings of the Moslem Jinns dwelling in
Babel-city and in the Garden of Iram, son of 'Ad the Greater,
he cried, "O my brother, knowest thou of what woman this is
the presentment, that we may seek for her?" Sayf al-Muluk
replied, "No, by Allah, O my brother, I know her not!" and
Sa'id rejoined, "Come, read this writing on the crown." So
Sayf al-Muluk read it and cried out from his heart's core and
very vitals, saying, "Alas! Alas! Alas!" Quoth Sa'id, "O my
brother, an the original of the portrait exist and her name be
Badi'a al-Jamal, and she abide in the world, I will hasten to
seek her, that thou mayst win thy will without delay. But,
Allah upon thee, O my brother, leave this weeping and ascend
thy throne, that the Officers of the State may come in to do
their service to thee, and in the undurn, do thou summon the
merchants and fakirs and travellers and pilgrims and paupers
and ask of them concerning this city and the garden of Iram;
haply by the help and blessing of Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!), some one of them shall direct us thither." So, when
it was day, Sayf al-Muluk went forth and mounted the throne,
clasping the tunic in his arms, for he could neither stand nor
sit without it, nor would sleep visit him save it were with
him; and the Emirs and Wazirs and Lords and Officers came in
to him. When the Divan was complete all being assembled in
their places he said to his Minister, "Go forth to them and
tell them that the King hath been suddenly struck by sickness
and he, by Allah, hath passed the night in ill case." So Sa'id
fared forth and told the folk what he said; which when old
King Asim heard, he was concerned for his son and, summoning
the physicians and astrologers, carried them in to Sayf
al-Muluk. They looked at him and prescribed him ptisanes and
diet-drinks, simples and medicinal waters and wrote him
characts and incensed him with Nadd and aloes-wood and
ambergris three days' space; but his malady persisted three
months, till King Asim was wroth with the leaches and said to
them, "Woe to you, O dogs! What? Are all of you impotent to
cure my son? Except ye heal him forthright, I will put the
whole of you to death." The Archiater replied, "O King of the
Age, in very sooth we know that this is thy son and thou
wottest that we fail not of diligence in tending a stranger;
so how much more with medicining thy son? But thy son is
afflicted with a malady hard to heal, which, if thou desire to
know, we will discover it to thee." Quoth Asim, "What then
find ye to be the malady of my son?"; and quoth the leach, "O
King of the Age, thy son is in love and he loveth one to whose
enjoyment he hath no way of access." At this the King was
wroth and asked, "How know ye that my son is in love and how
came love to him?"; they answered, "Enquire of his Wazir and
brother Sa'id for he knoweth his case." The King rose and
repaired to his private closet and summoning Sa'id said to
him, "Tell me the truth of thy brother's malady." But Sa'id
replied, "I know it not." So King Asim said to the Sworder,
"Take Sa'id and bind his eyes and strike his neck." Whereupon
Sa'id feared for himself and cried, "O King of the Age, grant
me immunity." Replied the King, "Speak and thou shalt have
it." "Thy son is in love." "With whom is he in love?" "With a
King's daughter of the Jann." "And where could he have espied
a daughter of the Jinns?" "Her portrait is wroughten on the
tunic that was in the bundle given thee by Solomon, prophet of
Allah!" When the King heard this, he rose, and going in to
Sayf al-Muluk, said to him, "O my son, what hath afflicted
thee? What is this portrait whereof thou art enamoured? And
why didst thou not tell me." He replied, "O my sire, I was
ashamed to name this to thee and could not bring myself to
discover aught thereof to any one at all; but now thou knowest
my case, look how thou mayest do to cure me." Rejoined his
father, "What is to be done? Were this one of the daughters of
men we might devise a device for coming at her; but she is a
King's daughter of the Jinns and who can woo and win her, save
it be Solomon David-son, and hardly he?[FN#390] However, O my
son, do thou arise forthright and hearten thy heart and take
horse and ride out a-hunting or to weapon-play in the Maydan.
Divert thyself with eating and drinking and put away cark and
care from thy heart, and I will bring thee an hundred maids of
the daughters of Kings; for thou hast no need to the daughters
of the Jann, over whom we lack controul and of kind other than
ours." But he said, "I cannot renounce her nor will I seek
other than her." Asked King Asim, "How then shall we do, O my
son?"; and Sayf al-Muluk answered, "Bring us all the merchants
and travellers and wanderers in the city, that we may question
them thereof. Peradventure, Allah will lead us to the city of
Babel and the garden of Iram." So King Asim bade summon all
the merchants in the city and strangers and seacaptains and,
as each came, enquired of him anent the city of Babel and its
peninsula[FN#391] and the garden of Iram; but none of them
knew these places nor could any give him tidings thereof.
However, when the seance broke up, one of them said, "O King
of the Age, an thou be minded to ken this thing, up and hie
thee to the land of China; for it hath a vast city[FN#392] and
a safe, wherein are store of rarities and things of price and
folk of all kinds; and thou shalt not come to the knowledge of
this city and garden but from its folk; it may be one of them
will direct thee to that thou seekest." Whereupon quoth Sayf
al-Muluk, "O my sire, equip me a ship, that I may fare to the
China-land; and do thou rule the reign in my stead." Replied
the old King, "O my son, abide thou on the throne of thy
kingship and govern thy commons, and I myself will make the
voyage to China and ask for thee of the city of Babel and the
garden of Iram." But Sayf al-Muluk rejoined, "O my sire, in
very sooth this affair concerneth me and none can search after
it like myself: so, come what will, an thou give me leave to
make the voyage, I will depart and wander awhile. If I find
trace or tidings of her, my wish will be won, and if not,
belike the voyage will broaden my breast and recruit my
courage; and haply by foreign travel my case will be made easy
to me, and if I live, I shall return to thee safe and
sound."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sayf
al-Muluk said to his sire King Asim, "Equip me a ship that I
may fare therein to the China-land and search for the object
of my desire. If I live I shall return to thee safe and
sound." The old King looked at his son and saw nothing for it
but to do what he desired; so he gave him the leave he wanted
and fitted him forty ships, manned with twenty thousand armed
Mamelukes, besides servants, and presented him with great
plenty of money and necessaries and warlike gear, as much as
he required. When the ships were laden with water and victual,
weapons and troops, Sayf al-Muluk's father and mother
farewelled him and King Asim said, "Depart, O my son, and
travel in weal and health and safety. I commend thee to Him
with Whom deposits are not lost."[FN#393] So the Prince bade
adieu to his parents and embarked, with his brother Sa'id and
they weighed anchor and sailed till they came to the City of
China. When the Chinamen heard of the coming of forty ships,
full of armed men and stores, weapons and hoards, they made
sure that these were enemies come to battle with them and
seige them; so they bolted the gates of the town and made
ready the mangonels.[FN#394] But Sayf al-Muluk, hearing of
this, sent two of his Chief Mamelukes to the King of China,
bidding them say to him, "This is Sayf al-Muluk, son of King
Asim of Egypt, who is come to thy city as a guest, to divert
himself by viewing thy country awhile, and not for conquest or
contention; wherefore, an thou wilt receive him, he will come
ashore to thee; and if not he will return and will not
disquiet thee nor the people of thy capital." They presented
themselves at the city gates and said, "We are messengers from
King Sayf al-Muluk." Whereupon the townsfolk opened the gates
and carried them to their King, whose name was Faghfur[FN#395]
Shah and between whom and King Asim there had erst been
acquaintance. So, when he heard that the new-comer Prince was
the son of King Asim, he bestowed robes of honour on the
messengers and, bidding open the gates, made ready guest-gifts
and went forth in person with the chief officers of his realm,
to meet Sayf al-Muluk, and the two Kings embraced. Then
Faghfur said to his guest, "Well come and welcome and fair
cheer to him who cometh to us! I am thy slave and the slave of
thy sire: my city is between thy hands to command and whatso
thou seekest shall be brought before thee." Then he presented
him with the guest-gifts and victual for the folk at their
stations; and they took horse, with the Wazir Sa'id and the
chiefs of their officers and the rest of their troops, and
rode from the sea-shore to the city, which they entered with
cymbals clashing and drums beating in token of rejoicing.
There they abode in the enjoyment of fair entertainment for
forty days, at the end of which quoth the King of China to
Sayf al-Muluk, "O son of my brother, how is thy case[FN#396]?
Doth my country please thee?"; and quoth Sayf al-Muluk, "May
Allah Almighty long honour it with thee, O King!" Said
Faghfur, "Naught hath brought thee hither save some need which
hath occurred to thee; and whatso thou desirest of my country
I will accomplish it to the." Replied Sayf al-Muluk, "O King,
my case is a wondrous, "and told him how he had fallen in love
with the portrait of Badi'a al-Jamal, and wept bitter tears.
When the King of China heard his story, he wept for pity and
solicitude for him and cried, "And what wouldst thou have now,
O Sayf al-Muluk?"; and he rejoined, "I would have thee bring
me all the wanderers and travellers, the seafarers and
sea-captains, that I may question them of the original of this
portrait; perhaps one of them may give me tidings of her." So
Faghfur Shah sent out his Nabobs and Chamberlains and
body-guards to fetch all the wanderers and travellers in the
land, and they brought them before the two Kings, and they
were a numerous company. Then Sayf al-Muluk questioned them of
the City of Babel and the Garden of Iram, but none of them
returned him a reply, whereupon he was bewildered and wist not
what to do; but one of the sea-captains said to him, "O
auspicious King, an thou wouldst know of this city and that
garden, up and hie thee to the Islands of the Indian
realm."[FN#397] Thereupon Sayf al-Muluk bade bring the ships;
which being done, they freighted them with vivers and water
and all that they needed, and the Prince and his Wazir
re-embarked, with all their men, after they had farewelled
King Faghfur Shah. They sailed the seas four months with a
fair wind, in safety and satisfaction till it chanced tha tone
day of the days there came out upon them a wind and the
billows buffeted them from all quarters. The rain and
hail[FN#398] descended on them and during twenty days the sea
was troubled for the violence of the wind; wherefor the ships
drave one against other and brake up, as did the
carracks[FN#399] and all on board were drowned, except Sayf
al-Muluk and some of his servants, who saved themselves in a
little cock-boat. Then the wind fell by the decree of Allah
Almighty and the sun shone out; whereupon Sayf al-Muluk opened
his eyes and seeing no sign of the ships nor aught, but sky
and sea, said to the Mamelukes who were with him, "Where are
the carracks and cock-boats and where is my brother Sa'id?"
They replied, "O King of the Age, there remain nor ships nor
boats nor those who were therein; for they are all drowned and
become food for fishes." Now when he heard this, he cried
aloud and repeated the saying which whoso saith shall not be
confounded, and it is, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" Then he fell to
buffeting his face and would have cast himself into the sea,
but his Mamelukes withheld him, saying "O King, what will this
profit thee? Thou hast brought all this on thyself; for, hadst
thou hearkened to thy father's words, naught thereof had
betided thee. But this was written from all eternity by the
will of the Creator of Souls."--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She resume, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sayf al-Muluk would have cast himself into the main, his
Mamelukes withheld him saying, "What will this profit thee?
Thou hast done this deed by thyself, yet was it written from
all eternity by the will of the Creator of Souls, that the
creature might accomplish that which Allah hath decreed unto
him. And indeed, at the time of thy birth, the astrologers
assured thy sire that all manner troubles should befal thee.
So there is naught for it but patience till Allah deliver us
from this our strait." Replied the Prince, "There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great! Neither is there refuge nor fleeing from that which He
decreeth!" And he sighed and recited these couplets,

"By the Compassionate, I'm dazed about my case for lo! *
     Troubles and griefs beset me sore; I know not whence they
     grow.
I will be patient, so the folk, that I against a thing *
     Bitt'rer than very aloes' self,[FN#400] endured have, may
     know.
Less bitter than my patience is the taste of aloes-juice; *
     I've borne with patience what's more hot than coals with
     fire aglow.
In this my trouble what resource have I, save to commit * My
     case to Him who orders all that is, for weal or woe?"

Then he became drowned in the depth of thoughts and his tears
ran down upon his cheeks like torrent-rain; and he slept a
while of the day, after which he awoke and sought of food
somewhat. So they set meat before him and he ate his
sufficiency, till they removed the food from before him,
whilst the boat drove on with them they knew not whither it
was wandering. It drifted with them at the will of the winds
and the waves, night and day a great while, till their victual
was spent and they saw themselves shent and were reduced to
extreme hunger and thirst and exhaustion, when behold,
suddenly they sighted an island from afar and the breezes
wafted them on, till they came thither. Then, making the
cock-boat fast to the coast and leaving one therein to guard
it, they fared on into the island, where they found abundance
of fruits of all colours and ate of them till they were
satisfied. Presently, they saw a person sitting among those
trees and he was long-faced, of strange favour and white of
beard and body. He called to one of the Mamelukes by his name,
saying, "Eat not of these fruits, for they are unripe; but
come hither to me, that I may give thee to eat of the best and
the ripest." The slave looked at him and thought that he was
one of the shipwrecked, who had made his way to that island;
so he joyed with exceeding joy at sight of him and went close
up to him, knowing not what was decreed to him in the Secret
Purpose nor what was writ upon his brow. But, when he drew
near, the stranger in human shape leapt upon him, for he was a
Marid,[FN#401] and riding upon his shoulderblades and twisting
one of his legs about his neck, let the other hang down upon
his back, saying, "Walk on, fellow; for there is no escape for
thee from me and thou art become mine ass." Thereupon the
Mameluke fell a-weeping and cried out to his comrades, "Alas,
my lord! Flee ye forth of this wood and save yourselves, for
one of the dwellers therein hath mounted on my shoulders, and
the rest seek you, desiring to ride you like me."When they
heard these words, all fled down to the boat and pushed off to
sea; whilst the islanders followed them into the water,
saying, "Whither wend ye? Come, tarry with us and we will
mount on your backs and give you meat and drink, and you shall
be our donkeys." Hearing this they hastened the more seawards
till they left them in the distance and fared on, trusting in
Allah Almighty; nor did they leave faring for a month, till
another island rose before them and thereon they landed. Here
they found fruits of various kinds and busied themselves with
eating of them, when behold, they saw from afar, somewhat
lying in the road, a hideous creature as it were a column of
silver. So they went up to it and one of the men gave it a
kick, when lo! it was a thing of human semblance, long of eyes
and cloven of head and hidden under one of his ears, for he
was wont, whenas he lay down to sleep, to spread on ear under
his head, and cover his face with the other ear.[FN#402] He
snatched up the Mameluke who had kicked him and carried him
off into the middle of the island, and behold, it was all full
of Ghuls who eat the sons of Adam. The man cried out to his
fellows, "Save yourselves, for this is the island of the
man-eating Ghuls, and they mean to tear me to bits and devour
me." When they heard these words they fled back to the boat,
without gathering any store of the fruits and putting out to
sea, fared on some days till it so happened that they came to
another island, where they found a high mountain. So they
climbed to the top and there saw a thick copse. Now they were
sore anhungered; so they took to eating of the fruits; but,
before they were aware, there came upon them from among the
trees black men of terrible aspect, each fifty cubits high
with eye-teeth[FN#403] protruding from their mouths like
elephants' tusks; and, laying hands on Sayf al-Muluk and his
company, carried them to their King, whom they found seated on
a piece of black felt laid on a rock, and about him a great
company of Zanzibar-blacks, standing in his service. The
blackamoors who had captured the Prince and his Mamelukes set
them before the King and said to him, "We found these birds
amoung the trees"; and the King was sharp-set; so he took two
of the servants and cut their throats and ate them;--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Zanzibar-blacks took Sayf al-Muluk and his Mamelukes and set
them before the King, saying, "O King, we came upon these
birds among the trees." Thereupon the King seized two of the
Mamelukes and cut their throats and ate them; which, when Sayf
al-Muluk saw, he feared for himself and wept and repeated
these verses,

"Familiar with my heart are woes and with them I * Who shunned
     them; for familiar are great hearts and high.
The woes I suffer are not all of single kind. * I have, thank
     Allah, varied thousands to aby!"

Then he signed and repeated these also,

"The World hath shot me with its sorrows till * My heart is
     covered with shafts galore;
And now, when strike me other shafts, must break * Against th'
     old points the points that latest pour."

When the King heard his weeping and wailing, he said, "Verily
these birds have sweet voices and their song pleaseth me: put
them in cages." So they set them each in his own cage and hung
them up at the King's head that he might listen to their
warbling. On this wise Sayf al-Muluk and his Mamelukes abode
and the blackamoors gave them to eat and drink: and now they
wept and now laughed, now spake and now were hushed, whilst
the King of the blacks delighted in the sound of their voices.
And so they continued for a long time. Now this King had a
daughter married in another island who, hearing that her
father had birds with sweet voices, sent a messenger to him
seeking of him some of them. So he sent her, by her
Cossid,[FN#404] Sayf al-Muluk and three of his men in four
cages; and, when she saw them, they pleased her and she bade
hang them up in a place over her head. The Prince fell to
marvelling at that which had befallen him and calling to mind
his former high and honourable estate and weeping for himself;
and the three servants wept for themselves; and the King's
daughter deemed that they sang. Now it was her wont, whenever
any one from the land of Egypt or elsewhere fell into her
hands and he pleased her, to advance him to great favour with
her; and by the decree of Allah Almighty it befel that, when
she saw Sayf al-Muluk she was charmed by his beauty and
loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace, and she commanded
to entreat him and his companions with honour and to loose
them from their cages. Now one day she took the Prince apart
and would have him enjoy her; but he refused, saying, "O my
lady, I am a banisht wight and with passion for a beloved one
in piteous plight, nor with other will I consent to
love-delight." Then she coaxed him and importuned him, but he
held aloof from her, and she could not approach him nor get
her desire of him by any ways and means. At last, when she was
weary of courting him in vain, she waxed wroth with him and
his Mamelukes, and commanded that they should serve her and
fetch her wood and water. In such condition they abode four
years till Sayf al-Muluk became weary of his life and sent to
intercede with the Princess, so haply she might release them
and let them wend their ways and be at rest from that their
hard labour. So she sent for him and said to him, "If thou
wilt do my desire, I will free thee from this thy durance vile
and thou shalt go to thy country, safe and sound." And she
wept and ceased not to humble herself to him and wheedle him,
but he would not hearken to her words; whereupon she turned
from him, in anger, and he and his companions abode on the
island in the same plight. The islanders knew them for "The
Princess's birds" and durst not work them any wrong; and her
heart was at ease concerning them, being assured that they
could not escape from the island. So they used to absent
themselves from her two and three days at a time and go round
about the desert parts in al directions, gathering firewood,
which they brought to the Princess's kitchen; and thus they
abode five[FN#405] years. Now one day it so chanced that the
Prince and his men were sitting on the sea-shore, devising of
what had befallen, and Sayf al-Muluk, seeing himself and his
men in such case, bethought him of his mother and father and
his brother Sa'id and, calling to mind what high degree he had
been in, fell a-weeping and lamenting passing sore, whilst his
slaves wept likewise. Then said they to him, "O King of the
Age, how long shall we weep? Weeping availeth not; for this
thing was written on our brows by the ordinance of Allah, to
whom belong Might and Majesty. Indeed, the Pen runneth with
that He decreeth and nought will serve us but patience: haply
Allah (extolled 