, vol. vii. p. 113 et seq., for a variant of the
story.

[FN#169] Third Abbaside, A.H. 158-169 (=775-785), and father
of Harun Al-Rashid. He is known chiefly for his
eccentricities, such as cutting the throats of all his
carrier-pigeons, making a man dine off marrow and sugar and
having snow sent to him at Meccah, a distance of 700 miles.

[FN#170] Arab. "Mirt"; the dictionaries give a short shift,
cloak or breeches of wool or coarse silk.

[FN#171] Arab. "Mayazib" plur. of the Pers. Mizab (orig.
Miz-i-ab=channel of water) a spout for roof-rain. That which
drains the Ka'abah on the N.-W. side is called Mizab al-Rahmah
(Gargoyle of Mercy) and pilgrims stand under it for a douche
of holy water. It is supposed to be of gold, but really of
silver gold-plated and is described of Burckhardt and myself.
(Pilgrimage iii. 164.) The length is 4 feet 10 in.; width 9
in.; height of sides 8 in.; and slope at mouth 1 foot 6 in
long.

[FN#172]  The Mac. and Bull Edits. have by mistake "Son of
Ishak." Lane has "Is-hale the Son of Ibrahim" following
Trebutien (iii. 483) but suggests in a note the right reading
as above.

[FN#173] Again masculine for feminine.

[FN#174] There are two of this name. The Upper al-Akik
contains the whole site of Al-Medinah; the Lower is on the
Meccan road about four miles S.W. of the city. The Prophet
called it "blessed" because ordered by an angel to pray
therein. The poets have said pretty things about it, e.g.

     O friend, this is the vale Akik; here stand and strive in
thought:
     If not a very lover, strive to be by love distraught!

for whose esoteric meaning see Pilgrimage ii. 24. I passed
through Al-Akik in July when it was dry as summer dust and its
"beautiful trees" were mere vegetable mummies.

[FN#175] Those who live in the wet climates of the Northern
temperates can hardly understand the delight of a shower in
rainless lands, like Arabia and Nubia. In Sind we used to
strip and stand in the downfall and raise faces sky-wards to
get the full benefit of the douche. In Southern Persia food is
hastily cooked at such times, wine strained, Kaliuns made
ready and horses saddled for a ride to the nearest gardens and
a happy drinking-bout under the cypresses. If a man refused,
his friends would say of him, " See how he turns his back upon
the blessing of Allah!" (like an ass which presents its tail
to the weather).

[FN#176] i.e. the destruction of the Barmecides.

[FN#177] He was Wazir to the Great "Saladin" (Salah al-Din = one
conforming with the Faith):, ) See vol. iv. 271, where Saladin
is also entitled Al-Malik c al-Nasir = the Conquering King. He
was a Kurd and therefore fond of boys (like Virgil, Horace,
etc.), but that perversion did not prey prevent his being one
of the noblest of men. He lies in the Great Amawi Mosque of
Damascus and I never visited a tomb with more reverence.

[FN#178] Arab. "Ahassa bi'l-Shurbah :" in our idiom "he smelt
a rat".

[FN#179] This and the next tale are omitted by Lane (iii. 254)
on "account of its vulgarity, rendered more objectionable by
indecent incidents." It has been honoured with a lithographed
reprint at Cairo A.H. 1278 and the Bresl. Edit. ix. 193 calls
it the "Tale of Ahmad al-Danaf with Dalilah."

[FN#180] "Ahmad, the Distressing Sickness," or "Calamity;"
Hasan the Pestilent and Dalilah the bawd. See vol. ii. 329,
and vol. iv. 75.

[FN#181] A foetus, a foundling, a contemptible fellow.

[FN#182] In the Mac. Edit. "her husband": the end of the tale
shows the error, infra, p. 171. The Bresl. Edit., x. 195,
informs us that Dalilah was a "Faylasufiyah"=philosopheress.

[FN#183] Arab. "Ibrik" usually a ewer, a spout-pot, from the
Pers. Ab-riz=water-pourer: the old woman thus vaunted her
ceremonial purity. The basin and ewer are called in poetry
"the two rumourers," because they rattle when borne about.

[FN#184] Khatun in Turk. is=a lady, a dame of high degree; at
times as here and elsewhere, it becomes a P. N.

[FN#185] Arab. "Maut," a word mostly avoided in the Koran and
by the Founder of Christianity.

[FN#186] Arab. "Akakir," drugs, spices, simples which cannot
be distinguished without study and practice. Hence the proverb
(Burckhardt, 703), Is this an art of drugs?--difficult as the
druggist's craft?

[FN#187] i.e. Beautiful as the fairy damsels who guard
enchanted treasures, such as that of Al-Shamardal (vol. vi.
221).

[FN#188] i.e. by contact with a person in a state of
ceremonial impurity; servants are not particular upon this
point and "Salat mamlukiyah" (Mameluke's prayers) means
praying without ablution.

[FN#189] i.e. Father of assaults, burdens or pregnancies; the
last being here the meaning.

[FN#190] Ex votos and so forth.

[FN#191] Arab. "Iksah," plaits, braids, also the little gold
coins and other ornaments worn in the hair, now mostly by the
middle and lower classes. Low Europeans sometimes take
advantage of the native prostitutes by detaching these
valuables, a form of "bilking" peculiar to the Nile-Valley.

[FN#192] In Bresl. Edit. Malih Kawi (pron. 'Awi), a Cairene
vulgarism.

[FN#193] Meaning without veil or upper clothing.

[FN#194] Arab. "Kallakas" the edible African arum before
explained. This Colocasia is supposed to bear, unlike the
palm, male and female flowers in one spathe.

[FN#195] See vol. iii. 302. The figs refer to the anus and the
pomegranates, like the sycomore, to the female parts. Me nec
faemina nec puer, &c., says Horace in pensive mood.

[FN#196] It is in accordance to custom that the Shaykh be
attended by a half-witted fanatic who would be made furious by
seeing gold and silks in the reverend presence so coyly
curtained.

[FN#197] In English, "God damn everything an inch high!"

[FN#198] Burckhardt notes that the Wali, or chief police
officer at Cairo, was exclusively termed Al-Agha and quotes
the proverb (No. 156) "One night the whore repented and
cried:--What! no Wali (Al-Agha) to lay whores by the heels?"
Some of these Egyptian by-words are most amusing and
characteristic; but they require literal translation, not the
timid touch of the last generation. I am preparing, for the
use of my friend, Bernard Quaritch, a bona fide version which
awaits only the promised volume of Herr Landberg.

[FN#199] Lit. for "we leave them for the present": the formula
is much used in this tale, showing another hand, author or
copyist.

[FN#200] Arab. "Uzrah."

[FN#201] i.e. "Thou art unjust and violent enough to wrong
even the Caliph!"

[FN#202] I may note that a "donkey-boy" like our "post-boy"
can be of any age in Egypt.

[FN#203] They could legally demand to be recouped but the
chief would have found some pretext to put off payment. Such
at least is the legal process of these days.

[FN#204] i.e. drunk with the excess of his beauty.

[FN#205] A delicate way of offering a fee. When officers
commanding regiments in India contracted for clothing the men,
they found these douceurs under their dinner-napkins. All that
is now changed; but I doubt the change being an improvement:
the public is plundered by a "Board" instead of an individual.

[FN#206] This may mean, I should know her even were my eyes
blue (or blind) with cataract and the Bresl. Edit. ix. 231,
reads "Ayni"=my eye; or it may be, I should know her by her
staring, glittering, hungry eyes, as opposed to the "Hawar"
soft-black and languishing (Arab. Prov. i. 115, and ii. 848).
The Prophet said "blue-eyed (women) are of good omen." And
when one man reproached another saying "Thou art Azrak"
(blue-eyed!) he retorted, "So is the falcon!" "Zurk-an" in
Kor. xx. 102, is translated by Mr. Rodwell "leaden eyes." It
ought to be blue-eyed, dim-sighted, purblind.

[FN#207] Arab, "Zalabiyah bi-'Asal."

[FN#208] Arab. "Ka'ah," their mess-room, barracks.

[FN#209] i.e. Camel shoulder-blade.

[FN#210] So in the Brazil you are invited to drink a copa
d'agua and find a splendid banquet. There is a smack of
Chinese ceremony in this practice which lingers throughout
southern Europe; but the less advanced society is, the more it
is fettered by ceremony and "etiquette."

[FN#211] The Bresl. edit. (ix. 239) prefers these lines:--

     Some of us be hawks and some sparrow-hawks, *
          And vultures some which at carrion pike;
     And maidens deem all alike we be *
          But, save in our turbands, we're not alike.

[FN#212] Arab. Shar a=holy law; here it especially applies to
Al-Kisas=lex talionis, which would order her eye-tooth to be
torn out.

[FN#213] i.e., of the Afghans. Sulaymani is the Egypt and
Hijazi term for an Afghan and the proverb says "Sulaymani
harami"--the Afghan is a villainous man. See Pilgrimage i. 59,
which gives them a better character. The Bresl. Edit. simply
says, "King Sulayman."

[FN#214] This is a sequel to the Story of Dalilah and both are
highly relished by Arabs. The Bresl. Edit. ix. 245, runs both
into one.

[FN#215] Arab. "Misr" (Masr), the Capital, says Savary,
applied alternately to Memphis, Fostat and Grand Cairo each of
which had a Jizah (pron. Gizah), skirt, angle, outlying
suburb.

[FN#216] For the curious street-cries of old Cairo see Lane
(M. E. chapt. xiv.) and my Pilgrimage (i. 120): here the
rhymes are of Zabib (raisins), habib (lover) and labib (man of
sense).

[FN#217] The Mac. and Bul. Edits. give two silly couplets of
moral advice:--

     Strike with thy stubborn steel, and never fear *
          Aught save the Godhead of Allmighty Might;
     And shun ill practices and never show *
          Through life but generous gifts to human sight.

The above is from the Bresl. Edit. ix. 247.

[FN#218] Arab. "Al-Khanakah" now more usually termed a
Takiyah. (Pilgrim. i. 124.)

[FN#219] Arab. "Ka'b al-ba'id" (Bresl. Edit. ix. 255)=heel or
ankle, metaph. for fortune, reputation: so the Arabs say the
"Ka'b of the tribe is gone!" here "the far one"=the
caravan-leader.

[FN#220] Arab. "Sharit," from Sharata=he Scarified;
"Mishrat"=a lancet and "Sharitah"=a mason's rule. Mr. Payne
renders "Sharit" by whinyard: it must be a chopper-like 
weapon, with a pin or screw (laulab) to keep the blade open
like the snap of the Spaniard's cuchillo. Dozy explains
it=epee, synonyme de Sayf.

[FN#221] Text "Dimagh," a Persianism when used for the head:
the word properly means brain or meninx.

[FN#222] They were afraid even to stand and answer this
remarkable ruffian.

[FN#223] Ahmad the Abortion, or the Foundling, nephew
(sister's son) of Zaynab the Coneycatcher. See supra, p. 145.

[FN#224] Here the sharp lad discovers the direction without
pointing it out. I need hardly enlarge upon the prehensile
powers of the Eastern foot: the tailor will hold his cloth
between his toes and pick up his needle with it, whilst the
woman can knead every muscle and at times catch a mosquito
between the toes. I knew an officer in India whose mistress
hurt his feelings by so doing at a critical time when he
attributed her movement to pleasure.

[FN#225] Arab. "Hullah"=dress. In old days it was composed of
the Burd or Rida, the shoulder-cloth from 6 to 9 or 10 feet
long, and the Izar or waistcloth which was either tied or
tucked into a girdle of leather or metal. The woman's
waistcloth was called Nitah and descended to the feet while
the upper part was doubled and provided with a Tikkah or
string over which it fell to the knees, overhanging the lower
folds. This doubling of the "Hujrah," or part round the waist,
was called the "Hubkah."

[FN#226] Arab. "Taghadda," the dinner being at eleven a.m. or
noon.

[FN#227] Arab. Ghandur for which the Dictionaries give only
"fat, thick." It applies in Arabia especially to a Harami,
brigand or freebooter, most honourable of professions, slain
in foray or fray, opposed to "Fatis" or carrion (the corps
creve of the Klephts), the man who dies the straw-death.
Pilgrimage iii. 66.

[FN#228] My fair readers will note with surprise how such
matters are hurried in the East. The picture is, however, true
to life in lands where "flirtation" is utterly unknown and,
indeed, impossible.

[FN#229] Arab. "Zabbah," the wooden bolt (before noticed)
which forms the lock and is opened by a slider and pins. It is
illustrated by Lane (M. E. Introduction).

[FN#230] i.e. I am not a petty thief.

[FN#231] Arab. Satl=kettle, bucket. Lat. Situla (?).

[FN#232] i.e. "there is no chance of his escaping." It may
also mean, "And far from him (Hayhat) is escape."

[FN#233] Arab. "Ihtilam" the sign of puberty in boy or girl;
this, like all emissions of semen, voluntary or involuntary,
requires the Ghuzl or total ablution before prayers can be
said, etc. See vol. v. 199, in the Tale of Tawaddud.

[FN#234] This is the way to take an Eastern when he tells a
deliberate lie; and it often surprises him into speaking the
truth.

[FN#235] The conjunctiva in Africans is seldom white; often it
is red and more frequently yellow.

[FN#236] So in the texts, possibly a clerical error for the
wine which he had brought with the kabobs. But beer is the
especial tipple of African slaves in Egypt.

[FN#237] Arab. "Laun", prop.=color, hue; but applied to
species and genus, our "kind"; and especially to dishes which
differ in appearance; whilst in Egypt it means any dish.

[FN#238] Arab. "Zardah"=rice dressed with honey and saffron.
Vol. ii. 313. The word is still common in Turkey.

[FN#239] Arab. "Laylat Arms," the night of yesterday
(Al-barihah) not our "last night" which would be the night of
the day spoken of.

[FN#240] Arab. "Yakhni," a word much used in Persia and India
and properly applied to the complicated broth prepared for the
rice and meat. For a good recipe see Herklots, Appendix xxix.

[FN#241] In token of defeat and in acknowledgment that she was
no match for men.

[FN#242] This is a neat touch of nature. Many a woman, even of
the world, has fallen in love with a man before indifferent to
her because he did not take advantage of her when he had the
opportunity.

[FN#243] The slightest movement causes a fight at a funeral or
a wedding-procession in the East; even amongst the "mild
Hindus."

[FN#244] Arab. "Al-Musran" (plur. of "Masir") properly the
intestines which contain the chyle. The bag made by Ali was,
in fact, a "Cundum" (so called from the inventor, Colonel
Cundum of the Guards in the days of Charles Second) or "French
letter"; une capote anglaise, a "check upon child." Captain
Grose says (Class. Dict. etc. s.v. Cundum) "The dried gut of a
sheep worn by a man in the act of coition to prevent venereal
infection. These machines were long prepared and sold by a
matron of the name of Philips at the Green Canister in Half
Moon Street in the Strand * * * Also a false scabbard over a
sword and the oilskin case for the colours of a regiment."
Another account is given in the Guide Pratique des Maladies
Secretes, Dr. G. Harris, Bruxelles. Librairie Populaire. He
calls these petits sachets de baudruche "Candoms, from the
doctor who invented them" (Littre ignores the word) and
declares that the famous Ricord compared them with a bad
umbrella which a storm can break or burst, while others term
them cuirasses against pleasure and cobwebs against infection.
They were much used in the last century. "Those pretended
stolen goods were Mr. Wilkes's Papers, many of which tended to
prove his authorship of the North Briton, No. 45, April 23,
1763, and some Cundums enclosed in an envelope" (Records of C.
of King's Bench, London, 1763). "Pour finir l'inventaire de
ces curiosites du cabinet de Madame Gourdan, il ne faut pas
omettre une multitude de redingottes appelees d'Angleterre, je
ne sais pourquois. Vous connoissez, an surplus, ces especes de
boucliers qu'on oppose aux traits empoisonnes de l'amour; et
qui n'emoussent que ceux du plaisir." (L'Observateur Anglois,
Londres 1778, iii. 69.) Again we read:--

     "Les capotes melancoliques
     Qui pendent chez les gros Millan (?)
     S'enflent d'elles-memes, lubriques,
     Et dechargent en se gonflant."
                                Passage Satyrique. 

Also in Louis Prolat:--

     "Il fuyait, me laissant une capote au cul."

The articles are now of two kinds mostly of baudruche (sheep's
gut) and a few of caout-chouc. They are made almost
exclusively in the faubourgs of Paris, giving employment to
many women and young girls; Grenelle turns out the baudruche
and Grenelle and Lilas the India-rubber article; and of the
three or four makers M. Deschamps is best known. The sheep's
gut is not joined in any way but of single piece as it comes
from the animal after, of course, much manipulation to make it
thin and supple; the inferior qualities are stuck together at
the sides. Prices vary from 4 1/2 to 36 francs per gross.
Those of India-rubber are always joined at the side with a
solution especially prepared for the purpose. I have also
heard of fish-bladders but can give no details on the subject.
The Cundum was unknown to the ancients of Europe although
syphilis was not: even prehistoric skeletons show traces of
its ravages.

[FN#245] Arab. "Ya Usta" (for "Ustaz.") The Pers. term is
Ustad=a craft-master, an artisan and especially a barber. Here
it is merely a polite address.

[FN#246] In common parlance Arabs answer a question (like the
classics of Europe who rarely used Yes and No, Yea and Nay),
by repeating its last words. They have, however, many
affirmative particles e.g. Ni'am which answers a negative
"Dost thou not go?"--Ni'am (Yes!); and Ajal, a stronger form
following a command, e.g. Sir (go)--Ajal, Yes verily. The
popular form is Aywa ('llahi)=Yes, by Allah. The chief
negatives are Ma and La, both often used in the sense of
"There is not."

[FN#247] Arab. "Khalbus," prop. the servant of the Almah-girls
who acts buffoon as well as pimp. The "Maskharah" (whence our
"mask") corresponds with the fool or jester of mediaeval
Europe: amongst the Arnauts he is called "Suttari" and is
known by his fox's tails: he mounts a mare, tom-toms on the
kettle-drum and is generally one of the bravest of the corps.
These buffoons are noted for extreme indecency: they generally
appear in the ring provided with an enormous phallus of
whip-cord and with this they charge man, woman and child, to
the infinite delight of the public.

[FN#248] Arab. "Shubash" pronounced in Egypt Shobash: it is
the Persian Shah-bash lit.=be a King, equivalent to our bravo.
Here, however, the allusion is to the buffoon's cry at an
Egyptian feast, "Shohbash 'alayk, ya Sahib al-faraj,"=a
present is due from thee, O giver of the fete " Sec Lane M. E.
xxvii.

[FN#249] Arab. "Ka'ak al-I'd:" the former is the Arab form of
the Persian "Kahk" (still retained in Egypt) whence I would
derive our word "cake." It alludes to the sweet cakes which
are served up with dates, the quatre mendiants and sherbets
during visits of the Lesser (not the greater) Festival, at the
end of the Ramazan fast. (Lane M.E. xxv.)

[FN#250] Arab. "Tasamah," a rare word for a peculiar slipper.
Dozy (s. v.) says only, espece de chaussure, sandale,
pantoufle, soulier.

[FN#251] Arab. "Ijtila"=the displaying of the bride on her
wedding night so often alluded to in The Nights.

[FN#252] Arab. Khiskhanah; a mixed word from Klaysh=canvass or
stuffs generally and Pers. Khanah=house room. Dozy (s.v.) says
armoire, buffet.

[FN#253] The Bresl. Edit. "Kamariyah"=Moon-like (fem.) for
Moon.

[FN#254] Every traveller describes the manners and customs of
dogs in Eastern cities where they furiously attack all canine
intruders. I have noticed the subject in writing of Al-Medinah
where the beasts are confined to the suburbs. (Pilgrimage ii.
52-54.)

[FN#255] She could legally compel him to sell her; because,
being an Infidel, he had attempted to debauch a Moslemah.

[FN#256] Arab. "Halawat wa Mulabbas"; the latter
etymologically means one dressed or clothed. Here it alludes
to almonds, etc., clothed or coated with sugar. See Dozy
(s.v.) "labas."

[FN#257] Arab. "'Ubb" from a root=being long: Dozy (s.v.),
says poche au sein; Habb al-'ubb is a woman's ornament.

[FN#258] Who, it will be remembered, was Dalilah's grandson.

[FN#259] Arab. "Tabut," a term applied to the Ark of the
Covenant (Koran ii. 349), which contained Moses' rod and
shoes, Aaron's mitre, the manna-pot, the broken Tables of the
Law, and the portraits of all the prophets which are to appear
till the end of time--an extensive list for a box measuring 3
by 2 cubits. Europeans often translate it coffin, but it is
properly the wooden case placed over an honoured grave. "Iran"
is the Ark of Moses' exposure, also the large hearse on which
tribal chiefs were carried to earth.

[FN#260] i.e. What we have related is not "Gospel Truth."

[FN#261] Omitted by Lane (iii. 252) "because little more than a
repetition" of Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya. This is true;
but the nice progress of the nurse's pimping is a
well-finished picture and the old woman's speech (infra p.
243) is a gem.

[FN#262] Artaxerxes; in the Mac. Edit. Azdashir, a misprint.

[FN#263] I use "kiss ground" as we say "kiss hands." But it
must not be understood literally: the nearest approach would
be to touch the earth with the finger-tips and apply them to
the lips or brow. Amongst Hindus the Ashtanga-prostration
included actually kissing the ground.

[FN#264] The "key" is mentioned because a fee so called
(miftah) is paid on its being handed to the new lodger.
(Pilgrimage i. 62.)

[FN#265] The Koranic term for semen, often quoted.

[FN#266] Koran, xii. 31, in the story of Joseph, before
noticed.

[FN#267] Probably the white woollens, so often mentioned,
whose use is now returning to Europe, where men have a
reasonable fear of dyed stuffs, especially since Aniline
conquered Cochineal.

[FN#268] Arab. "samir," one who enjoys the musamarah or
night-talk outside the Arab tents. "Samar" is the shade of the
moon, or half darkness when only stars shine without a moon,
or the darkness of a moonless night. Hence the proverb (A. P.
ii. 513) "Ma af'al-hu al-samar wa'l kamar;" I will not do it
by moondarkness or by moonshine, i.e. never. I have elsewhere
remarked that "Early to bed and early to rise" is a civilised
maxim; most barbarians sit deep into the night in the light of
the moon or a camp-fire and will not rise till nearly noon.
They agree in our modern version of the old saw:--

     Early to bed and early to rise
     Makes a man surly and gives him red eyes.

The Shayks of Arab tribes especially transact most of their
public business during the dark hours.

[FN#269] Suspecting that it had been sent by some Royal lover.

[FN#270] Arab. "Rubbama" a particle more emphatic than
rubba,=perhaps, sometimes, often.

[FN#271] "The broken (wall)" from Hatim=breaking. It fences
the Hijr or space where Ishmael is buried (vol. vi. 205); and
I have described it in Pilgrimage iii. 165.

[FN#272] Arab. "Farais" (plur. of farisah): the phrase has
often occurred and is=our "trembled in every nerve." As often
happens in Arabic, it is "horsey;" alluding to the
shoulder-muscles (not shoulder-blades, Preston p. 89) between
neck and flank which readily quiver in blood-horses when
excited or frightened.

[FN#273] Arab. "Fazl"=exceeding goodness as in "Fazl wa
ma'rifah"=virtue and learning.

[FN#274] Arab. "Al-Mafarik" (plur. of Mafrak),=the pole or
crown of the head, where the hair parts naturally and where
baldness mostly begins.

[FN#275] Arab. "Na'i al-maut", the person sent round to
announce a death to the friends and relations of the deceased
and invite them to the funeral.

[FN#276] Arab. "Tair al-bayn", any bird, not only the Hatim or
black crow, which announces separation. Crows and ravens flock
for food to the camps broken up for the springtide and
autumnal marches, and thus become emblems of desertion and
desolation. The same birds are also connected with Abel's
burial in the Koran (v. 34), a Jewish tradition borrowed by
Mohammed. Lastly, here is a paranomasia in the words "Ghurab
al-Bayn"=Raven of the Wold (the black bird with white breast
and red beak and legs): "Ghurab" (Heb. Oreb) connects with
Ghurbah=strangerhood, exile, and "Bayn" with distance,
interval, disunion, the desert (between the cultivated spots).
There is another and a similar pun anent the Ban-tree; the
first word meaning "he fared, he left."

[FN#277] Arab. "Tayr," any flying thing, a bird; with true
Arab carelessness the writer waits till the tale is nearly
ended before letting us know that the birds are pigeons
(Hamam).

[FN#278] Arab. "Karr'aynan." The Arabs say, "Allah cool thine
eye," because tears of grief are hot and those of joy cool
(Al-Asma'i); others say the cool eye is opposed to that heated
by watching; and Al-Hariri (Ass. xxvii.) makes a scorching
afternoon "hotter than the tear of a childless mother." In the
burning climate of Arabia coolth and refrigeration are
equivalent to refreshment and delight.

[FN#279] Arab. "Muunah," the "Mona" of Maroccan travellers
(English not Italian who are scandalised by "Mona") meaning
the provisions supplied gratis by the unhappy villagers to all
who visit them with passport from the Sultan. Our cousins
German have lately scored a great success by paying for all
their rations which the Ministers of other nations, England
included, were mean enough to accept.

[FN#280] Arab. "Kaannahu huwa"; lit.=as he (was) he. This
reminds us of the great grammarian, Sibawayh, whose name the
Persians derive from "Apple-flavour"(Sib + bu). He was
disputing, in presence of Harun al-Rashid with a rival
Al-Kisa'i, and advocated the Basrian form, "Fa-iza huwa hu"
(behold, it was he) against the Kufan, "Fa-iza huwa iyyahu"
(behold, it was him). The enemy overcame him by appealing to
Badawin, who spoke impurely, whereupon Sibawayh left the
court, retired to Khorasan and died, it is said of a broken
heart.

[FN#281] This is a sign of the Saudawi or melancholic
temperament in which black bile pre-dominates. It is supposed
to cause a distaste for society and a longing for solitude, an
unsettled habit of mind and neglect of worldly affairs. I
remarked that in Arabia students are subject to it, and that
amongst philosophers and literary men of Mecca and Al-Medinah
there was hardly one who was not spoken of as a "Saudawi." See
Pilgrimage ii. 49, 50.

[FN#282] i.e. I am a servant and bound to tell thee what my
orders are.

[FN#283] A touching lesson on how bribes settle matters in the
East.

[FN#284] i.e. fresh from water (Arab. "Rutub"), before the air
can tarnish them. The pearl (margarita) in Arab. is Lu'lu';
the "unio" or large pearl Durr, plur. Durar. In modern
parlance Durr is the second quality of the twelve into which
pearls are divided.

[FN#285] i.e. the Wazir, but purposely left vague.

[FN#286] The whole of the nurse's speech is admirable: its
naive and striking picture of conjugal affection goes far to
redeem the grossness of The Nights.

[FN#287] The bitterness was the parting in the morning.

[FN#288] English "Prin'cess," too often pronounced in French
fashion Princess.

[FN#289] In dictionaries "Ban" (Anglice ben-tree) is the
myrobalan which produces gum benzoin. It resembles the
tamarisk. Mr. Lyall (p. 74 Translations of Ancient Arab
Poetry, Williams and Norgate, 1885), calls it a species of
Moringa, tall, with plentiful and intensely green foliage used
for comparisons on account of its straightness and graceful
shape of its branches. The nut supplies a medicinal oil.

[FN#290] A sign of extreme familiarity: the glooms are the
hands and the full moons are the eyes.

[FN#291] Arab. "Khal'a al-'izar": lit.=stripping off jaws or
side-beard.

[FN#292] Arab. "Shimal"=the north wind.

[FN#293] An operation well described by Juvenal--

     Illa supercilium, modica fuligine tactum,
     Obliqua producit acu, pingitque, trementes
     Attolens oculos.

Sonnini (Travels in Egypt, chapt. xvi.) justly remarks that
this pencilling the angles of the eyes with Kohl, which the
old Levant trade called alquifoux or arquifoux, makes them
appear large and more oblong; and I have noted that the modern
Egyptian (especially Coptic) eye, like that of the Sphinx and
the old figures looks in profile as if it were seen in full.
(Pilgrimage i. 214.)

[FN#294] The same traveller notes a singular property in the
Henna-flower that when smelt closely it exhales a "very
powerful spermatic odour," hence it became a favourite with
women as the tea-rose with us. He finds it on the nails of
mummies, and identifies it with the Kupros of the ancient
Greeks (the moderns call it Kene or Kena) and the           
       (Botrus cypri) of Solomon's Song (i. 14). The Hebr. is
"Copher," a well-known word which the A. V. translates by "a
cluster of camphire (?) in the vineyards of En-gedi"; and a
note on iv. 13 ineptly adds, "or, cypress." The Revised Edit.
amends it to "a cluster of henna-flowers." The Solomonic (?)
description is very correct; the shrub affects vineyards, and
about Bombay forms fine hedges which can be smelt from a
distance.

[FN#295] Hardly the equivalent of the Arab. "Kataba" (which
includes true tattooing with needles) and is applied to
painting "patches" of blue or green colour, with sprigs and
arabesques upon the arms and especially the breasts of women.
"Kataba" would also be applied to striping the fingers with
Henna which becomes a shining black under a paste of honey,
lime and sal-ammoniac. This "patching" is alluded to by Strabo
and Galen (Lane M. E. chapt. ii.); and we may note that
savages and barbarians can leave nothing of beauty unadorned;
they seem to hate a plain surface like the Hindu silversmith,
whose art is shown only in chasing.

[FN#296] A violent temper, accompanied with voies de fait and
personal violence, is by no means rare amongst Eastern
princesses; and terrible tales are told in Persia concerning
the daughters of Fath Ali Shah. Few men and no woman can
resist the temptations of absolute command. The daughter of a
certain Dictator all-powerful in the Argentine Republic was
once seen on horseback with a white bridle of peculiar
leather; it was made of the skin of a man who had boasted of
her favours. The slave-girls suffer first from these masterful
young persons and then it is the turn of the eunuchry.

[FN#297] A neat touch; she was too thorough-bred to care for
herself first.

[FN#298] Here the ground or earth is really kissed.

[FN#299] Corresponding with our phrase, "His heart was in his
mouth."

[FN#300] Very artful is the contrast of the love-lorn
Princess's humility with her furious behaviour, in the pride
of her purity, while she was yet a virginette and fancy free.

[FN#301] Arab. "Suhbat-hu" lit.=in company with him, a popular
idiom in Egypt and Syria. It often occurs in the Bresl. Edit.

[FN#302] In the Mac. Edit. "Shahzaman," a corruption of Shah
Zaman=King of the Age. (See vol. i. 2)

[FN#303] For a note on this subject see vol. ii. 2.

[FN#304] i.e. bathe her and apply cosmetics to remove ail traces
of travel.

[FN#305] These pretentious and curious displays of coquetry
are not uncommon in handsome slave-girls when newly bought;
and it is a kind of pundonor to humour them. They may also
refuse their favours and a master who took possession of their
persons by brute force would be blamed by his friends, men and
women. Even the most despotic of despots, Fath Ali Shah of
Persia, put up with refusals from his slave-girls and did not,
as would the mean-minded, marry them to the grooms or cooks of
the palace.

[FN#306] Such continence is rarely shown by the young Jallabs or
slave-traders; when older they learn how much money is lost
with the chattel's virginity.

[FN#307] Midwives in the East, as in the less civilised parts of
the West, have many nostrums for divining the sex of the
unborn child.

[FN#308] Arabic (which has no written "g") from Pers. Gulnar
(Gul-i-anar) pomegranate-flower the Gulnare" of Byron who
learnt his Orientalism at the Mekhitarist (Armenian) Convent,
Venice. I regret to see the little honour now paid to the
gallant poet in the land where he should be honoured the most.
The systematic depreciation was begun by the late Mr.
Thackeray, perhaps the last man to value the noble
independence of Byron's spirit; and it has been perpetuated, I
regret to see, by better judges. These critics seem wholly to
ignore the fact that Byron founded a school which covered
Europe from Russia to Spain, from Norway to Sicily, and which
from England passed over to the two Americas. This exceptional
success, which has not yet fallen even to Shakespeare's lot,
was due to genius only, for the poet almost ignored study and
poetic art. His great misfortune was being born in England
under the Gerogium Sidus. Any Continental people would have
regarded him s one of the prime glories of his race.

[FN#309] Arab. "Fi al-Kamar," which Lane renders "in the
moonlight" It seems to me that the allusion is to the Comorin
Islands; but the sequel speaks simply of an island.

[FN#310] The Mac. Edit. misprints Julnar as Julnaz (so the Bul
Edit. ii. 233), and Lane 's Jullanar is an Egyptian vulgarism.
He is right in suspecting the "White City" to be imaginary,
but its sea has no apparent connection with the Caspian. The
mermen and mermaids appear to him to be of an inferior order
of the Jinn, termed Al-Ghawwasah, the Divers, who fly through
air and are made of fire which at times issues from their
mouths.

[FN#311] Arab. "  la Kulli hal," a popular phrase, like the
Anglo-American " anyhow."

[FN#312] In the text the name does not appear till near the end
of the tale.

[FN#313] i.e. Full moon smiling.

[FN#314] These lines have occurred in vol. iii. 264. so I quote
Lane ii. 499.

[FN#315] 'These lines occurred in vol. ii. 301. I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#316] Arab. "Khadd" = cheek from the eye-orbit to the place
where the beard grows; also applied to the side of a rough
highland, the side-planks of a litter, etc. etc.

[FN#317] The black hair of youth.

[FN#318] This manner of listening is not held dishonourable
amongst Arabs or Easterns generally; who, however, hear as
little good of themselves as Westerns declare in proverb.

[FN#319] Arab. "Hasab wa nasab," before explained as inherited
degree and acquired dignity. See vol. iv. 171.

[FN#320] Arab. "Mujajat"=spittle running from the mouth: hence
Lane, "is like running saliva," which, in poetry is not
pretty.

[FN#321] Arab. and Heb. "Salmandra" from Pers. Samandal (--
dar--duk--dun, etc.), a Salamander, a mouse which lives in
fire, some say a bird in India and China and others confuse
with the chameleon (Bochart Hiero. Part ii. chapt. vi).

[FN#322] Arab. "Maha" one of the four kinds of wild cows or
bovine antelopes, bubalus, Antelope defassa, A. Ieucoryx, etc.

[FN#323] These lines have occurred in vol. iii. 279; so I quote
Lane (iii. 274) by way of variety; although I do not like his
" bowels."

[FN#324] The last verse (286) of chapt. ii. The Cow:
"compelleth" in the sense of "burdeneth."

[FN#325] Salih's speeches are euphuistic.

[FN#326]  From the Fatihah.

[FN#327] A truly Eastern saying, which ignores the "old maids"
of the West.

[FN#328] i.e naming her before the lieges as if the speaker
were her and his superior. It would have been more polite not
to have gone beyond " the unique pearl and the hoarded jewel
:" the offensive part of the speech was using the girl's name.

[FN#329] Meaning emphatically that one and all were nobodies.

[FN#330] Arab Badr, the usual pun.

[FN#331] Arab. "Kirat" (        ) the bean of the Abrus
precatorius, used as a weight in Arabia and India and as a
bead for decoration in Africa. It is equal to four Kamhahs or
wheat grains and about 3 grs. avoir.; and being the twenty
fourth of a miskal, it is applied to that proportion of
everything. Thus the Arabs say of a perfect man, " He is of
four-and-twenty Kirat" i.e. pure gold. See vol. iii. 239.

[FN#332] The (she) myrtle: Kazimirski (A. de Biberstein)
Dictionnaire Arabe-Francais (Pairs Maisonneuve 1867) gives
Marsin=Rose de Jericho: myrte.

[FN#333] Needless to note that the fowler had a right to
expect a return present worth double or treble the price of
his gift. Such is the universal practice of the East: in the
West the extortioner says, "I leave it to you, sir!"

[FN#334] And she does tell him all that the reader well knows.

[FN#335] This was for sprinkling him, but the texts omit that
operation. Arabic has distinct terms for various forms of
metamorphosis. " Naskh " is change from a lower to a higher,
as beast to man; " Maskh " (the common expression) is the
reverse, " Raskh " is from animate to inanimate (man to stone)
and "Faskh" is absolute wasting away to corruption.

[FN#336] I render this improbable detail literally: it can
only mean that the ship was dashed against a rock.

[FN#337] Who was probably squatting on his shop counter. The
"Bakkal" (who must not be confounded with the epicier), lit.
"vender of herbs" =greengrocer, and according to Richardson
used incorrectly for Baddal ( ?) vendor of provisions.
Popularly it is applied to a seller of oil, honey, butter and
fruit, like the Ital. "Pizzicagnolo"=Salsamentarius, and in
North-West Africa to an inn-keeper.

[FN#338] Here the Shaykh is mistaken: he should have said,
"The Sun in old Persian." "Almanac" simply makes nonsense of
the Arabian Circe's name. In Arab. it is "Takwim," whence the
Span. and Port. "Tacuino:" in Heb. Hakamatha-Takunah=sapientia
dis positionis astrorum (Asiat. Research. iii.120).

[FN#339] i.e. for thy daily expenses.

[FN#340] Un adolescent aime toutes les femmes. Man is by
nature polygamic whereas woman as a rule is monogamic and
polyandrous only when tired of her lover. For the man, as has
been truly said, loves the woman, but the love of the woman is
for the love of the man.

[FN#341] I have already noted that the heroes and heroines of
Eastern love-tales are always bonne fourchettes: they eat and
drink hard enough to scandalise the sentimental amourist of
the West; but it is understood that this abundant diet is
necessary to qualify them for the Herculean labours of the
love night.

[FN#342] Here again a little excision is necessary; the reader
already knows all about it.

[FN#343] Arab. "Hiss," prop. speaking a perception (as of
sound or motion) as opposed to "Hades," a surmise or opinion
without proof.

[FN#344] Arab. "Sawik," the old and modern name for native
frumenty, green grain (mostly barley) toasted, pounded, mixed
with dates or sugar and eaten on journeys when cooking is
impracticable. M. C. de Perceval (iii. 54), gives it a
different and now unknown name; and Mr. Lane also applies it
to "ptisane." It named the " Day of Sawaykah " (for which see
Pilgrimage ii. 19), called by our popular authors the " War of
the Meal-sacks."

[FN#345] Mr. Keightley (H. 122-24 Tales and Popular Fictions,
a book now somewhat obsolete) remarks, "There is nothing said
about the bridle in the account of the sale (infra), but I am
sure that in the original tale, Badr's misfortunes must have
been owing to his having parted with it. In Chaucer's Squier's
Tale the bridle would also appear to have been of some
importance. "He quotes a story from the Notti Piacevoli of
Straparola, the Milanese, published at Venice in 1550. And
there is a popular story of the kind in Germany.

[FN#346] Here, for the first time we find the name of the
mother who has often been mentioned in the story. Farashah is
the fem. or singular form of "Farash," a butterfly, a moth.
Lane notes that his Shaykh gives it the very unusual sense of
"a locust."

[FN#347] Punning upon Jauharah= "a jewel" a name which has an
Hibernian smack.

[FN#348] In the old version "All the lovers of the Magic Queen
resumed their pristine forms as soon as she ceased to live;"
moreover, they were all sons of kings, princes, or persons of
high degree.

[FN#349] Arab. "Munadamah," = conversation over the cup
(Lane), used somewhat in the sense of "Musamarah" = talks by
moonlight.

[FN#350] Arab. "Kursi," a word of many meanings; here it would
allure to the square crate-like seat of palm-fronds used by
the Rawi or public reciter of tales when he is not pacing
about the coffee-house.

[FN#351] Von Hammer remarks that this is precisely the sum
paid in Egypt for a MS. copy of The Nights.

[FN#352] Arab. "Samar," the origin of Musamarah, which see,
vol. iv. 237.

[FN#353] The pomp and circumstance, with which the tale is
introduced to the reader showing the importance attached to
it. Lane, most inudiciously I think, transfers the Proemium to
a note in chapt. xxiv., thus converting an Arabian Night into
an Arabian Note.

[FN#354] 'Asim = defending (honour) or defended, son of Safwan
= clear, cold (dry). Trebutien ii. 126, has Safran.

[FN#355] Faris = the rider, the Knight, son of Salih = the
righteous, the pious, the just.

[FN#356] In sign of the deepest dejection, when a man would
signify that he can fall no lower.

[FN#357] Arab. Ya Khawand (in Bresl. Edit. vol. iv. 191) and
fem. form Khawandah (p. 20) from Pers. Khawand or Khawandagar
= superior, lord, master; Khudawand is still used in popular
as in classical Persian, and is universally understood in
Hindostan.

[FN#358] The Biblical Sheba, whence came the Queen of many
Hebrew fables.

[FN#359] These would be the interjections of the writer or
story-teller. The Mac. Edit. is here a sketch which must be
filled up by the Bresl. Edit. vol. iv. 189-318: "Tale of King
Asim and his son Sayf al-Muluk with Badi'a al-Jamal."

[FN#360] The oath by the Seal-ring of Solomon was the Stygian
"swear" in Fairy-land. The signet consisted of four jewels,
presented by as many angels, representing the Winds, the
Birds, Earth (including sea) and Spirits, and the gems were
inscribed with as many sentences: (1) To Allah belong Majesty
and Might; (2) All created things praise the Lord; (3) Heaven
and Earth are Allah's slaves and (4) There is no god but the
God and Mohammed is His messenger. For Sakhr and his theft of
the signet see Dr. Weil's, "The Bible, the Koran, and the
Talmud."

[FN#361] Trebutien (ii. 128) remarks, "Cet Assaf peut etre
celui auquel David adresse plusieurs de ses psaumes, et que
nos interpretes disent avoir ete son maitre de chapelle (from
Biblioth. Orient).

[FN#362] Mermen, monsters, beasts, etc.

[FN#363] This is in accordance with Eastern etiqette; the
guest must be fed before his errand is asked. The Porte, in
the days of its pride, managed in this way sorely to insult
the Ambassadors of the most powerful European kingdoms and the
first French Republic had the honour of abating the
barbarians' nuisance. So the old Scottish Highlanders never
asked the name or clan of a chance guest, lest he prove a foe
before he had eaten their food.

[FN#364] In Bresl. Edit. (301) Khafiyah: in Mac. Khainah, the
perfidy.

[FN#365] So in the Mac. Edit., in the Bresl. only one "Kaba"
or Kaftan; but from the sequel it seems to be a clerical
error.

[FN#366] Arab. "Su'uban" (Thu'uban) popularly translated
"basilisk." The Egyptians suppose that when this serpent forms
ring round the Ibn 'Irs (weasel or ichneumon) the latter emits
a peculiar air which causes the reptile to burst.

[FN#367] i.e. that prophesied by Solomon.

[FN#368] Arab. "Takliyah" from kaly, a fry: Lane's Shaykh
explained it as "onions cooked in clarified butter, after
which they are put upon other cooked food." The mention of
onions points to Egypt as the origin of this tale and
certainly not to Arabia, where the strong-smelling root is
hated.

[FN#369] Von Hammer quotes the case of the Grand Vizier Yusuf
throwing his own pelisse over the shoulders of the Aleppine
Merchant who brought him the news of the death of his enemy,
Jazzar Pasha.

[FN#370] This peculiar style of generosity was also the custom
in contemporary Europe.

[FN#371] Khatun, which follows the name (e.g. Hurmat Khatun),
in India corresponds with the male title Khan, taken by the
Pathan Moslems (e.g. Pir Khan). Khanum is the affix to the
Moghul or Tartar nobility, the men assuming a double
designation e.g. Mirza Abdallah Beg. See Oriental collections
(Ouseley's) vol. i. 97.

[FN#372] Lit. "Whatso thou wouldest do that do!" a contrast
with our European laconism.

[FN#373] These are booths built against and outside the walls,
made of palm-fronds and light materials.

[FN#374] Von Hammer in Trebutien (ii. 135) says, "Such
rejoicings are still customary at Constantinople, under the
name of Donanma, not only when the Sultanas are enceintes, but
also when they are brought to bed. In 1803 the rumour of the
pregnancy of a Sultana, being falsely spread, involved all the
Ministers in useless expenses to prepare for a Donanma which
never took place." Lane justly remarks upon this passage that
the title Sultan precedes while the feminine Sultanah follows
the name.

[FN#375] These words (Bresl. Edit.) would be spoken in jest, a
grim joke enough, but showing the elation of the King's
spirits.

[FN#376] A signal like a gong: the Mac. Edit. reads "Takah," =
in at the window.

[FN#377] Sayf al-Muluk = "Sword (Egyptian Sif, Arab. Sayf, Gr.
     ) of the Kings"; and he must not be called tout bonnement
Sayf. Sai'd = the forearm.

[FN#378] Arab. "Fakih" = a divine, from Fikh = theology, a man
versed in law and divinity i.e. (1) the Koran and its
interpretation comprehending the sacred ancient history of the
creation and prophets (Chapters iii., iv., v. and vi.), (2)
the traditions and legends connected with early Moslem History
and (3) some auxiliary sciences as grammar, syntax and
prosody; logic, rhetoric and philosophy. See p. 18 of
"El-Mas'udi's Historical Encyclopaedia etc.," By my friend
Prof. Aloys Springer, London 1841. This fine fragment printed
by the Oriental Translation Fund has been left unfinished
whilst the Asiatic Society of Paris has printed in Eight Vols.
8vo the text and translation of MM. Barbier de Meynard and
Pavet de Courteille. What a national disgrace! And the same
with the mere abridgment of Ibn Batutah by Prof. Lee (Orient.
Tr. Fund 1820) when the French have the fine Edition and
translation by Defremery and Sanguinetti with index etc. in 4
vols. 8vo 1858-59. But England is now content to rank in such
matters as encouragement of learning, endowment of research
etc., with the basest of kingdoms, and the contrast of status
between the learned Societies of London and of Paris, Berlin,
Vienna or Rome is mortifying to an Englishman--a national
opprobrium.

[FN#379] Arab. "Maydan al-Fil," prob. for Birkat al-Fil, the
Tank of the Elephant before-mentioned. Lane quotes Al Makrizi
who in his Khitat informs us that the lakelet was made abot
the end of the seventh century (A.H.), and in the seventeenth
year of the eighth century became the site of the stables. The
Bresl. Edit. (iv. 214) reads "Maydan al-'Adl," prob. for
Al-'Adil the name of the King who laid out the Maydan.

[FN#380] Arab. "Ashab al-Ziya'," the latter word mostly
signifies estates consisting, strictly speaking of land under
artificial irrigation.

[FN#381] The Bresl. Edit. (iv. 215) has "Chawashiyah" =
'Chiaush, the Turkish word, written with the Pers. "ch," a
letter which in Arabic is supplanted by "sh," everywhere
except in Morocco.

[FN#382] Arab. "Zawiyah" lit. a corner, a cell. Lane (M. F.,
chapt. xxiv.) renders it "a small kiosque," and translates the
famous Zawiyat al-Umyan (Blind Men's Angle) near the
south-eastern corner of the Azhar or great Collegiate Mosque
of Cairo, "Chapel of the Blind" (chapt. ix.). In popular
parlance it suggests a hermitage.

[FN#383] Arab. "Takht," a Pers. word used as more emphatic
than the Arab. Sarir.

[FN#384] This girding the sovereign is found in the
hieroglyphs as a peculiarity of the ancient Kings of Egypt,
says Von Hammer referring readers to Denon.

[FN#385] Arab. "Mohr," which was not amongst the gifts of
Solomon in Night dcclx. The Bresl. Edit. (p. 220) adds "and
the bow," which is also de trop.

[FN#386] Arab. "Batanah," the ordinary lining opp. to Tazrib,
or quilting with a layer of coton between two folds of cloth.
The idea in the text is that the unhappy wearer would have to
carry his cross (the girl) on his back.

[FN#387] This line has occurred in Night dccxliv. supra p.
280.

[FN#388] Arab. "Mu'attik al-Rikab" i.e. who frees those in
bondage from the yoke.

[FN#389] In the Mac. Edit. and in Trebutien (ii. 143) the King
is here called Schimakh son of Scharoukh, but elsewhere,
Schohiali = Shahyal, in the Bresl. Edit. Shahal. What the
author means by "Son of 'Ad the Greater," I cannot divine.

[FN#390] Lit. "For he is the man who can avail thereto," with
the meaning given in the text.

[FN#391] Arab. "Jazirat," insula or peninsula, vol. i. 2.

[FN#392] Probably Canton with which the Arabs were familiar.

[FN#393] i.e. "Who disappointeth not those who put their trust
in Him."

[FN#394] Arab. "Al-Manjanikat" plur. of manjanik, from Gr.
        , Lat. Manganum (Engl. Mangonel from the dim.
Mangonella). Ducange Glossarium, s.v. The Greek is applied
originally to defensive weapons, then to the artillery of the
day, Ballista, catapults, etc. The kindred Arab. form
"Manjanin" is applied chiefly to the Noria or Persian
waterwheel.

[FN#395] Faghfur is the common Moslem title for the Emperors
of China; in the Kamus the first syllable is Zammated (Fugh);
in Al-Mas'udi (chapt. xiv.) we find Baghfur and in Al-Idrisi
Baghbugh, or Baghbun. In Al-Asma'i Bagh = god or idol (Pehlewi
and Persian); hence according to some Baghdad (?) and
Baghistan a pagoda (?). Sprenger (Al-Mas'udi, p. 327) remarks
that Baghfur is a literal translation of Tien-tse and quotes
Visdelou, "pour mieux faire comprendre de quel ciel ils
veulent parler, ils poussent la genealogie (of the Emperor)
plus loin. Ils lui donnent le ciel pour pere, la terre pour
mere, le soleil pour frere aine et la lune pour soeur ainee."

[FN#396] Arab. "Kayf halak" = how de doo? the salutation of a
Fellah.

[FN#397] i.e. subject to the Maharajah of Hind.

[FN#398] This is not a mistake: I have seen heavy hail in
Africa, N. Lat. 4 degrees; within sight of the Equator.

[FN#399] Arab. "Harrakta." here used in the sense of smaller
craft, and presently for a cock-boat.

[FN#400] See vol. i. 138: here by way of variety I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#401] This explains the Arab idea of the "Old Man of the
Sea" in Sindbad the Seaman (vol. vi. 50). He was not a monkey
nor an unknown monster; but an evil Jinni of the most powerful
class, yet subject to defeat and death.

[FN#402] These Plinian monsters abound in Persian literature.
For a specimen see Richardson Dissert. p. xlviii.

[FN#403] Arab. "Anyab," plur. of "Nab" = canine tooth
(eye-tooth of man), tusks of horse and camel, etc.

[FN#404] Arab, "Kasid," the Anglo-Indian Cossid. The post is
called Barid from the Persian "buridah" (cut) because the
mules used for the purpose were dock-tailed. Barid applies
equally to the post-mule, the rider and the distance from one
station (Sikkah) to another which varied from two to six
parasangs. The letter-carrier was termed Al-Faranik from the
Pers. Parwanah, a servant. In the Diwan al-Barid (Post-office)
every letter was entered in a Madraj or list called in Arabic
Al-Askidar from the Persian "Az Kih dari" = from whom hast
thou it?

[FN#405] "Ten years" in the Bresl. Edit. iv. 244.

[FN#406] In the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 245) we find "Kalak," a
raft, like those used upon the Euphrates, and better than the
"Fulk," or ship, of the Mac. Edit.

[FN#407] Arab. "Timsah" from Coptic (Old Egypt) Emsuh or Msuh.
The animal cannot live in salt-water, a fact which proves that
the Crocodile Lakes on the Suez Canal were in old days fed by
Nile-water; and this was necessarily a Canal.

[FN#408] So in the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 245). In the Mac. text
"one man," which better suits the second crocodile, for the
animal can hardly be expected to take two at a time.

[FN#409] He had ample reason to be frightened. The large
Cynocephalus is exceedingly dangerous. When travelling on the
Gold Coast with my late friend Colonel De Ruvignes, we
suddenly came in the grey of the morning upon a herd of these
beasts. We dismounted, hobbled our nags and sat down, sword
and revolver in hand. Luckily it was feeding time for the
vicious brutes, which scowled at us but did not attack us.
During my four years' service on the West African Coast I
heard enough to satisfy me that these powerful beasts often
kill me and rape women; but I could not convince myself that
they ever kept the women as concubines.

[FN#410] As we should say in English "it is a far cry to Loch
Awe": the Hindu by-word is, "Dihli (Delhi) is a long way off."
S