N.B.--Mr. Badger, p. 1, wrongly derives Sachalitis from
"Sawáhíly": it is evidently "Sáhili.") The people bear by no
means the best character: Ibn Batutah (fourteenth century)
says, "their wives are most base; yet, without denying this,
their husbands express nothing like jealousy on the subject."
(Lee, p. 62.)

[FN#20] The name I have said of a quasi-historical personage,
son of Joktan, the first Arabist and the founder of the Tobbá
("successor") dynasty in Al-Yaman; while Jurham, his brother,
established that of Al-Hijaz. The name is probably chosen
because well-known.

[FN#21] Arab. "Hákim": lit. one who orders; often confounded
by the unscientific with Hakím, doctor, a philosopher. The
latter re-appears in the Heb. Khákhám applied in modern days
to the Jewish scribe who takes the place of the Rabbi.

[FN#22] As has been seen, acids have ever been and are still
administered as counter-inebriants, while hot spices and
sweets greatly increase the effect of Bhang, opium, henbane,
datura &c. The Persians have a most unpleasant form of
treating men when dead-drunk with wine or spirits. They hang
them up by the heels, as we used to do with the drowned, and
stuff their mouths with human ordure which is sure to produce
emesis.

[FN#23] Compare the description of the elephant-faced Vetála
(Kathá S.S. Fasc. xi. p. 388).

[FN#24] The lover's name Sá'ik= the Striker (with lightning);
Najmah, the beloved= the star.

[FN#25] I have modified the last three lines of the Mac. Edit.
which contain a repetition evidently introduced by the
carelessness of the copyist.

[FN#26] The Hindu Charvakas explain the Triad, Bramha, Vishnu
and Shiva, by the sexual organs and upon Vishnu's having four
arms they gloss, "At the time of sexual intercourse, each man
and woman has as many." (Dabistan ii. 202.) This is the
Eastern view of Rabelais' "beast with two backs." 

[FN#27] Arab. "Rabbat-i," my she Lord, fire (nár) being
feminine.

[FN#28] The prose-rhyme is answerable for this galimatias.

[FN#29] A common phrase equivalent to our "started from his
head."

[FN#30] Arab. "Máridúna"=rebels (against Allah and his
orders).

[FN#31] Arab. Yáfis or Yáfat. He had eleven sons and was
entitled Abú al-Turk because this one engendered the Turcomans
as others did the Chinese, Scythians, Slaves (Saklab), Gog,
Magog, and the Muscovites or Russians. According to the
Moslems there was a rapid falling off in size amongst this
family. Noah's grave at Karak (the Ruin) a suburb of Zahlah,
in La Brocquière's "Valley of Noah, where the Ark was built,"
is 104 ft. 10 in. Iong by 8 ft. 8 in. broad. (N.B.--It is a
bit of the old aqueduct which Mr. Porter, the learned author
of the "Giant Cities of Bashan," quotes as a "traditional
memorial of primeval giants"--talibus carduis pascuntur
asini!). Nabi Ham measures only 9 ft. 6 in. between headstone
and tombstone, being in fact about as long as his father was
broad.

[FN#32] See Night dcliv., vol. vii, p. 43, infra.

[FN#33] According to Turcoman legends (evidently pose-
Mohammedan) Noah gave his son, Japhet a stone inscribed with
the Greatest Name, and it had the virtue of bringing on or
driving off rain. The Moghuls long preserved the tradition and
hence probably the sword.

[FN#34] This expresses Moslem sentiment; the convert to Al-
Islam being theoretically respected and practically despised.
The Turks call him a "Burmá"=twister, a turncoat, and no one
either trusts him or believes in his sincerity.

[FN#35] The name of the city first appears here: it is found
also in the Bul. Edit., vol. ii. p. 132.

[FN#36] Arab. " 'Amala hílah," a Syro-Egyptian vulgarism.

[FN#37] i.e. his cousin, but he will not use the word.

[FN#38] Arab. "La'ab," meaning very serious use of the sword:
we still preserve the old "sword-play." 

[FN#39] Arab. " Ikhsa,"  from a root meaning to drive away a
dog.

[FN#40] Arab. "Hazza-hu," the quivering motion given to the
"Harbak" (a light throw-spear or javelin) before it leaves the
hand. 

[FN#41] Here the translator must either order the sequence of
the sentences or follow the rhyme.

[FN#42] Possibly taken from the Lions' Court in the
Alhambra=(Dár) Al-hamrá, the Red House.

[FN#43] Arab. "Sházarwán" from Pers. Shadurwán, a palace,
cornice, etc. That of the Meccan Ka'abah is a projection of
about a foot broad in pent-house shape sloping downwards and
two feet above the granite pavement: its only use appears in
the large brass rings welded into it to hold down the
covering. There are two breaks in it, one under the doorway
and the other opposite Ishmael's tomb; and pilgrims are
directed during circuit to keep the whole body outside it.

[FN#44] The "Musáfahah" before noticed, vol. vi., p. 287.

[FN#45] i.e. He was confounded at its beauty.

[FN#46] Arab. "'Ajíb," punning upon the name. 

[FN#47] Arab. "Zarráf" (whence our word) from "Zarf"=walking
hastily: the old "cameleopard" which originated the nursery
idea of its origin. It is one of the most timid of the
antelope tribe and unfit for riding.

[FN#48] Arab. "Takht," a useful word, meaning even a saddle.
The usual term is "Haudaj"=the Anglo Indian "howdah."

[FN#49] "Thunder-King," Arab. and Persian.

[FN#50] i.e. "He who violently assaults his peers" (the best
men of the age). Batshat al- Kubrá=the Great Disaster, is
applied to the unhappy "Battle of Bedr" (Badr) on Ramazan 17,
A.H. 2 (=Jan. 13, 624) when Mohammed was so nearly defeated
that the Angels were obliged to assist him (Koran, chapts.
iii. 11; i. 42; viii. 9). Mohammed is soundly rated by
Christian writers for beheading two prisoners Utbah ibn Rabí'a
who had once spat on his face and Nazir ibn Háris who recited
Persian romances and preferred them to the "foolish fables of
the Koran." What would our forefathers have done to a man who
spat in the face of John Knox and openly preferred a French
play to Pentateuch ? 

[FN#51] Arab. "Jilbáb" either habergeon (mail-coat) or the
buff-jacket worn under it.
   
[FN#52] A favourite way, rough and ready, of carrying light
weapons, often alluded to in The Nights. So Khusrawán in Antar
carried "under his thighs four small darts, each like a
blazing flame."

[FN#53] Mr. Payne very reasonably supplants here and below
Fakhr Taj (who in Night dcxxxiv is left in her father's palace
and who is reported to be dead in Night dclxvii.) by Star o'
Morn. But the former is also given in the Bul. Edit. (ii.
148), so the story teller must have forgotten all about her. I
leave it as a model specimen of Eastern incuriousness.

[FN#54] There is some chivalry in his unwillingness to use the
magical blade. As a rule the Knights of Romance utterly ignore
fair play and take every dirty advantage in the magic line
that comes to hand. 

[FN#55] Arab. "Hammál al-Hatabi"=one who carries to market the
fuel-sticks which he picks up m the waste. In the Koran
(chaps. cxi.) it is applied to Umm Jamíl, wife of Mohammed's
hostile cousin, Abd al-Uzza, there termed Abú Lahab (Father of
smokeless Flame) with the implied meaning that she will bear
fuel to feed Hell-fire.

[FN#56] Arab. "Akyál," lit. whose word (Kaul) is obeyed, a
title of the Himyarite Kings, of whom Al-Bergendi relates that
one of them left an inscription at Samarcand, which many
centuries ago no man could read. This evidently alludes to the
dynasty which preceded the "Tobba" and to No. xxiv. Shamar
Yar'ash (Shamar the Palsied). Some make him son of Malik
surnamed Náshir al-Ni'am (Scatterer of Blessings) others of
Afríkús (No. xviii.), who, according to Al-Jannabi, Ahmad bin
Yusuf and Ibn Ibdun (Pocock, Spec. Hist. Arab.) founded the
Berber (Barber) race, the remnants of the Causanites expelled
by the "robber, Joshua son of Nún," and became the eponymus of
"Africa." This word which, under the Romans, denoted a small
province on the Northern Sea-board, is, I would suggest,
A'far-Káhi (Afar-land), the Afar being now the Dankali race,
the country of Osiris whom my learned friend, the late
Mariette Pasha, derived from the Egyptian "Punt" identified by
him with the Somali country. This would make "Africa," as it
ought to be, an Egyptian (Coptic) term.

[FN#57] Herodotus (i. 80) notes this concerning the camel.
Elephants are not allowed to walk the streets in Anglo-Indian
cities, where they have caused many accidents.

[FN#58] Arab. Wahk or Wahak, suggesting the Roman retiarius.
But the lasso pure and simple, the favourite weapon of
shepherd and herdsmen was well-known to the old Egyptians and
in ancient India. It forms one of the T-letters in the
hieroglyphs. 

[FN#59] Compare with this and other Arab battle-pieces the
Pandit's description in the Kathá Sarit Sagara, e.g. "Then a
confused battle arose with dint of arrow, javelin, lance, mace
and axe, costing the lives of countless soldiers (N.B.--
Millions are nothing to him); rivers of blood flowed with the
bodies of elephants and horses for alligators, with the pearls
from the heads of elephants for sands and with the heads of
heroes for stones. That feast of battle delighted the flesh-
loving demons who, drunk with blood instead of wine, were
dancing with the palpitating trunks," etc.. etc. Fasc. xii.
526. 

[FN#60] The giraffe is here mal-placé: it is, I repeat, one of
the most timid of the antelope tribe. Nothing can be more
graceful than this huge game as it stands under a tree
extending its long and slender neck to the foliage above it;
but when in flight all the limbs seem loose and the head is
carried almost on a level with the back. 

[FN#61] The fire-arms may have been inserted by the copier;
the cross-bow (Arcubalista) is of unknown antiquity. I have
remarked in my book of the Sword (p. 19) that the bow is the
first crucial evidence of the distinction between the human
weapon and the bestial arm, and like the hymen or membrane of
virginity proves a difference of degree if not of kind between
man and the so-called lower animals. I note from Yule's Marco
Polo (ii., 143) " that the cross-bow was re-introduced into
European warfare during the twelfth century"; but the
arbalesta was well known to the bon roi Charlemagne (Regnier
Sat. X).

[FN#62] In Al-Islam this was unjustifiable homicide, excused
only because the Kafir had tried to slay his own son. He
should have been summoned to become a tributary and then, on
express refusal, he might legally have been put to death.

[FN#63] i.e. "Rose King," like the Sikh name "Gulab
Singh"=Rosewater Lion, sounding in translation almost too
absurd to be true.

[FN#64] "Repentance acquits the penitent" is a favourite and
noble saying popular in Al-Islam. It is first found in Seneca;
and is probably as old as the dawn of literature.

[FN#65] Here an ejaculation of impatience.

[FN#66] i.e. "King Intelligence": it has a ludicrous sound
suggesting only "Dandanha-i-Khirad,,=wisdom-teeth. The Mac.
Edit. persistently keeps "Ward Shah," copyist error. 

[FN#67] i.e. Fakhr Taj, who had been promised him in marriage.
See Night dcxxxlii. supra, vol. vi.

[FN#68] The name does not appear till further on, after vague
Eastern fashion which, here and elsewhere I have not had the
heart to adopt. The same may be found in Ariosto, passim.

[FN#69] A town in Persian Irak, unhappily far from the "Salt
sea."

[FN#70] "Earthquake son of Ennosigaius" (the Earthquake-
maker).

[FN#71] Arab. "Ruba'al-Kharáb" or Ruba'al-Khálí (empty
quarter), the great central wilderness of Arabia covering some
50,000 square miles and still left white on our maps.
(Pilgrimage, i 14.)

[FN#72] Pers. "Life King", women also assume the title of
Shah.

[FN#73] Arab. "Mujauhar": the watery or wavy mark upon Eastern
blades is called the "jauhar," lit.=jewel. The peculiarity is
also called water and grain, which gives rise to a host of
double-entendres, puns, paronomasias and conceits more or less
frigid.

[FN#74] Etymologically meaning tyrants or giants; and applied
to great heathen conquerors like Nimrod and the mighty rulers
of Syria, the Anakim, Giants and other peoples of Hebrew
fable. The Akásirah are the Chosroës before noticed.

[FN#75] Arab. "Asker jarrár" lit. "drawing": so in Egyptian
slang "Nás jarrár"=folk who wish to draw your money out of
your pocket, greedy cheats.

[FN#76] In Turkestan: the name means "Two lights."

[FN#77] In Armenia, mentioned by Sadik Isfaháni (Transl. p.
62).

[FN#78] This is the only ludicrous incident in the tale which
justifies Von Hammer's suspicion. Compare it with the combat
between Rustam and his son Sohráb.

[FN#79] I cannot understand why Trébutien, iii., 457, writes
this word Afba. He remarks that it is the "Oina and Riya" of
Jámí, elegantly translated by M. de Chezy in the Journal
Asiatique, vol. 1, 144.

[FN#80] I have described this part of the Medinah Mosque in
Pilgrimage ii., 62-69. The name derives from a saying of
Mohammed (of which there are many variants), "Between my tomb
and my pulpit is a garden of the Gardens of Paradise"
(Burckhardt, Arabia, p. 337). The whole Southern portico (not
only a part) now enjoys that honoured name and the tawdry
decorations are intended to suggest a parterre.

[FN#81] Mohammed's companions (Asháb), numbering some five
hundred, were divided into two orders, the Muhájirin
(fugitives) or Meccans who accompanied the Apostle to
Al-Medinah (Pilgrimage ii. 138) and the Ansár (Auxiliaries) or
Medinites who invited him to their city and lent him zealous
aid (Ibid. ii. 130). The terms constantly occur in Arab
history.

[FN#82] The "Mosque of the Troops," also called Al-Fath
(victory), the largest of the "Four Mosques:" it is still a
place of pious visitation where prayer is granted. Koran,
chap. xxxiii., and Pilgrimage ii. 325.

[FN#83] Arab. "Al-Wars," with two meanings. The Alfáz Adwiyah
gives it=Kurkum, curcuma, turmeric, safran d'Inde; but popular
usage assigns it to Usfur, Kurtum or safflower (carthamus
tinctorius). I saw the shrub growing all about Harar which
exports it, and it is plentiful in Al-Yaman (Niebuhr, p. 133),
where women affect it to stain the skin a light yellow and
remove freckles: it is also an internal remedy in leprosy. But
the main use is that of a dye, and the Tob stained with Wars
is almost universal in some parts of Arabia. Sonnini (p. 510)
describes it at length and says that Europeans in Egypt call
it "Parrot-seeds" because the bird loves it, and the Levant
trader "Saffrenum."

[FN#84] Two men of the great 'Anazah race went forth to gather
Karaz, the fruit of the Sant (Mimosa Nilotica) both used for
tanning, and never returned. Hence the proverb which is
obsolete in conversation. See Burckhardt, Prov. 659: where it
takes the place of "ad Graecas Kalendas."

[FN#85] Name of a desert (Mafázah) and a settlement on the
Euphrates' bank between Basrah and the site of old Kufah near
Kerbela; the well known visitation place in Babylonian Irak.

[FN#86] Of the Banu Sulaym tribe; the adjective is Sulami not
Sulaymi.

[FN#87] Arab. "Amám-ak"=before thee (in space); from the same
root as Imam=antistes, leader of prayer; and conducing to
perpetual puns, e.g. "You are Imám-i (my leader) and therefore
should be Amám-i" (in advance of me).

[FN#88] He was angry, as presently appears, because he had
heard of certain love passages between the two and this in
Arabia is a dishonour to the family.

[FN#89] Euphemy for "my daughter."

[FN#90] The Badawin call a sound dollar "Kirsh hajar" or
"Riyal hajar" (a stone dollar; but the word is spelt with the
greater h).

[FN#91] Arab. Burdah and Habárah. The former often translated
mantle is a thick woollen stuff, brown or gray, woven oblong
and used like a plaid by day and by night. Mohammed's Burdah
woven in his Harem and given to the poet, Ka'ab, was 7 1/2 ft.
long by 4 1/2: it is still in the upper Serraglio of Stambul.
In early days the stuff was mostly striped; now it is either
plain or with lines so narrow that it looks like one colour.
The Habarah is a Burd made in Al-Yaman and not to be
confounded with the Egyptian mantilla of like name (Lane, M.
E. chapt. iii.).

[FN#92] Every Eastern city has its special title. Al-Medinah
is entitled "Al-Munawwarah" (the Illumined) from the blinding
light which surrounds the Prophet's tomb and which does not
show to eyes profane (Pilgrimage ii. 3). I presume that the
idea arose from the huge lamps of "The Garden." I have noted
that Mohammed's coffin suspended by magnets is an idea unknown
to Moslems, but we find the fancy in Al-Harawi related of St.
Peter, "Simon Cephas (the rock) is in the City of Great Rome,
in its largest church within a silver ark hanging by chains
from the ceiling." (Lee, Ibn Batutah, p. 161).

[FN#93] Here the fillets are hung instead of the normal
rag-strips to denote an honoured tomb. Lane (iii. 242) and
many others are puzzled about the use of these articles. In
many cases they are suspended to trees in order to transfer
sickness from the body to the tree and whoever shall touch it.
The Sawáhílí people term such articles a Keti (seat or
vehicle) for the mysterious haunter of the tree who prefers
occupying it to the patient's person. Briefly the custom still
popular throughout Arabia, is African and Fetish.

[FN#94] Al-Mas'údí (chap. xcv.), mentions a Hind bint Asmá and
tells a facetious story of her and the "enemy of Allah," the
poet Jarir.

[FN#95] Here the old Shiah hatred of the energetic conqueror
of Oman crops out again. Hind's song is that of Maysum
concerning her husband Mu'áwiyah which Mrs. Godfrey Clark
('Ilâm-en-Nâs, p. 108) thus translates:-- 

     A hut that the winds make tremble
        Is dearer to me than a noble palace;
     And a dish of crumbs on the floor of my home
        Is dearer to me than a varied feast;
     And the soughing of the breeze through every crevice
        Is dearer to me than the beating of drums.

Compare with Dr. Carlyle's No. X.:-- 

     The russet suit of camel's hair
        With spirits light and eye serene
     Is dearer to my bosom far
        Than all the trappings of a queen, etc. etc.

And with mine (Pilgrimage iii. 262):-- 

     O take these purple robes away,
        Give back my cloak of camel's hair
     And bear me from this towering pile
        To where the black tents flap i' the air, etc. etc.

[FN#96] AI-Hajjaj's tribal name was Al-Thakifi or descendant
of Thakíf. According to Al-Mas'udi, he was son of Faríghah
(the tall Beauty) by Yúsuf bin Ukayl the Thakafite and vint au
monde tout difforme avec l'anus obstrué. As he refused the
breast, Satan, in human form, advised suckling him with the
blood of two black kids, a black buck-goat and a black snake;
which had the desired effect.

[FN#97] Trebutien, iii., 465, translates these sayings into
Italian.

[FN#98] Making him a "Kawwád"=leader, i.e. pimp; a true piece
of feminine spite. But the Caliph prized Al-Hajjaj too highly
to treat him as in the text.

[FN#99] i.e. "The overflowing," with benefits; on account of
his generosity.

[FN#100] The seventh Ommiade A. H. 96-99 (715-719). He died of
his fine appetite after eating at a sitting a lamb, six fowls,
seventy pomegranates, and 11 1/4 lbs. of currants. He was also
proud of his youth and beauty and was wont to say, "Mohammed
was the Apostle and Abu Bakr witness to the Truth; Omar the
Discriminator and Othman the Bashful, Mu'awiyah the Mild and
Yazid the Patient; Abd al-Malik the Administrator and Walid
the Tyrant; but I am the Young King!"

[FN#101] Arab. Al-Jazírah, "the Island;" name of the region
and the capital.

[FN#102] i.e. "Repairer of the Slips of the Generous," an
evasive reply, which of course did not deceive the questioner.

[FN#103] Arab. "Falastín," now obsolete. The word has echoed
far west and the name of the noble race has been degraded to
"Philister," a bourgeois, a greasy burgher.

[FN#104] Saying, "The Peace be with thee, O Prince of True
Believers!"

[FN#105] Arab. "Mutanakkir," which may also mean proud or in
disguise.

[FN#106] On appointment as viceroy. See vol. iii 307.

[FN#107] The custom with outgoing Governors. It was adopted by
the Spaniards and Portuguese especially in America. The
generosity of Ikrimah without the slightest regard to justice
or common honesty is characteristic of the Arab in
story-books.

[FN#108] The celebrated half-way house between Jaffa and
Jerusalem.

[FN#109] Alias the Kohistan or mountain region, Susiana
(Khuzistan) whose capital was Susa; and the head-quarters of
fire-worship. Azar (fire) was the name of Abraham's father
whom Eusebius calls "Athar." (Pilgrimage iii. 336.) 

[FN#110] Tenth Ommiade A.H. 105-125 (=724-743), a wise and
discreet ruler with an inclination to avarice and asceticism.
According to some, the Ommiades produced only three statesmen,
Mu'awayah, Abd al-Malik and Hisham; and the reign of the
latter was the end of sage government and wise administration.

[FN#111] About £1,250, which seems a long price; but in those
days Damascus had been enriched with the spoils of the world
adjacent.

[FN#112] Eleventh Ommiade dynasty, A.H. 125-126 (=743-744).
Ibn Sahl (son of ease, i.e. free and easy) was a nickname; he
was the son of Yazíd II. and brother of Hishám. He scandalised
the lieges by his profligacy, wishing to make the pilgrimage
in order to drink upon the Ka'abah-roof; so they attacked the
palace and lynched him. His death is supposed to have been
brought about (27th of Jamáda al-Akhirah = April 16, 744) by
his cousin and successor Yazíd (No. iii.) surnamed the
Retrencher. The tale in the text speaks well for him; but
generosity amongst the Arabs covers a multitude of sins, and
people say, "Better a liberal sinner than a stingy saint."

[FN#113] The tents of black wool woven by the Badawi women are
generally supported by three parallel rows of poles lengthways
and crossways (the highest line being the central) and the
covering is pegged down. Thus the outline of the roofs forms
two or more hanging curves, and these characterise the
architecture of the Tartars and Chinese; they are still
preserved in the Turkish (and sometimes in the European)
"Kiosque," and they have extended to the Brazil where the
upturned eaves, often painted vermilion below, at once attract
the traveller's notice.

[FN#114] See vol. iv., 159. The author of "Antar," known to
Englishmen by the old translation of Mr. Terrick Hamilton,
secretary of Legation at Constantinople. There is an
abridgement of the forty-five volumes of Al-Asma'i's "Antar"
which mostly supplies or rather supplied the "Antariyyah" or
professional tale-tellers; whose theme was the heroic Mulatto
lover.

[FN#115] The "Dakkah" or long wooden sofa, as opposed to the
"mastabah" or stone bench, is often a tall platform and in
mosques is a kind of ambo railed round and supported by
columns. Here readers recite the Koran: Lane (M.E. chapt.
iii.) sketches it in the "Interior of a Mosque."

[FN#116] Alif, Ha and Waw, the first, twenty-seventh and
twenty-sixth letters of the Arabic alphabet: No. 1 is the most
simple and difficult to write caligraphically.

[FN#117] Reeds washed with gold and used for love-letters, &c.

[FN#118] Lane introduced this tale into vol. i., p. 223, notes
on chapt. iii., apparently not knowing that it was in The
Nights. He gives a mere abstract, omitting all the verse, and
he borrowed it either from the Halbat al-Kumayt (chapt. xiv.)
or from Al-Mas'údí (chapt. cxi.). See the French translation,
vol. vi. p. 340. I am at pains to understand why M. C. Barbier
de Maynard writes "Réchid" with an accented vowel; although
French delicacy made him render, by "fils de courtisane," the
expression in the text, "O biter of thy mother's enlarged (or
uncircumcised) clitoris" (Bazar).

[FN#119] In Al-Mas'údi the Devil is "a young man fair of
favour and formous of figure," which is more appropriate to a
"Tempter." He also wears light stuffs of dyed silks.

[FN#120] It would have been more courteous in an utter
stranger to say, O my lord.

[FN#121] The Arab Tempe (of fiction, not of grisly fact).

[FN#122] These four lines are in Al-Mas'údi, chapt, cxviii.
Fr. Trans. vii. 313, but that author does not tell us who
wrote them.

[FN#123] i.e. Father of Bitterness=the Devil. This legend of
the Foul Fiend appearing to Ibrahim of Mosul (and also to
Isam, N. dcxcv.) seems to have been accepted by contemporaries
and reminds us of similar visitations in Europe--notably to
Dr. Faust. One can only exclaim, "Lor, papa, what nonsense you
are talking!" the words of a small girl whose father thought
proper to indoctrinate her into certain Biblical stories. I
once began to write a biography of the Devil; but I found that
European folk-lore had made such an unmitigated fool of the
grand old Typhon-Ahriman as to take away from him all human
interest.

[FN#124] In Al-Mas'udi the Caliph exclaims, "Verily thou hast
received a visit from Satan!"

[FN#125] Al-Mas'udi, chapt. cxix. (Fr. transl. vii., 351)
mentions the Banu Odhrah as famed for lovers and tells the
pathetic tale of 'Orwah and 'Afrá.

[FN#126] Jamil bin Ma'amar the poet has been noticed in Vol.
ii. 102; and he has no business here as he died years before
Al-Rashid was born. The tale begins like that of Ibn Mansúr
and the Lady Budúr (Night cccxxvii.), except that Mansur does
not offer his advice.

[FN#127] Arab. "Halumma," an interjection=bring! a congener of
the Heb. "Halúm"; the grammarians of Kufah and Bassorah are
divided concerning its origin.

[FN#128] Arab. "Nafs-í" which here corresponds with our
canting "the flesh" the "Old Adam," &c.

[FN#129] Arab. "Atmárí" used for travel. The Anglo-Americans
are the only people who have the common sense to travel (where
they are not known) in their "store clothes" and reserve the
worst for where they are known.

[FN#130] e.g. a branch or bough.

[FN#131] Arab. "Ráyah káimah," which Lane translates a "beast
standing"!

[FN#132] Tying up the near foreleg just above the knee; and
even with this a camel can hop over sundry miles of ground in
the course of a night. The hobbling is shown in Lane. (Nights
vol. ii., p. 46.)

[FN#133] As opposed to "Severance" in the old knightly
language of love, which is now apparently lost to the world. I
tried it in the Lyrics of Camoens and found that I was
speaking a forgotten tongue, which mightily amused the common
sort of critic and reviewer. 

[FN#134] More exactly three days and eight hours, after which
the guest becomes a friend, and as in the Argentine prairies
is expected to do friend's duty. The popular saying is, "The
entertainment of a guest is three days; the viaticum (jáizah)
is a day and a night, and whatso exceedeth this is alms."

[FN#135] Arab. "'Ashírah." Books tell us there are seven
degrees of connection among the Badawin: Sha'ab, tribe or
rather race; nation (as the Anazah) descended from a common
ancestor; Kabílah the tribe proper (whence les Kabyles);
Fasílah (sept), Imarah; Ashirah (all a man's connections);
Fakhiz (lit. the thigh, i.e., his blood relations) and Batn
(belly) his kith and kin. Practically Kabílah is the tribe,
Ashírah the clan, and Bayt the household; while Hayy may be
anything between tribe and kith and kin.

[FN#136] This is the true platonic love of noble Arabs, the
Ishk 'uzrí, noted in vol. ii., 104.

[FN#137] Arab. "'Alá raghm," a favourite term. It occurs in
theology; for instance, when the Shí'ahs are asked the cause
of such and such a ritual distinction they will reply, "Ala
raghmi 'l-Tasannun": lit.=to spite the Sunnis.

[FN#138] In the text "Al-Kaus" for which Lane and Payne
substitute a shield. The bow had not been mentioned but--
n'importe, the Arab reader would say. In the text it is left
at home because it is a cowardly, far-killing weapon compared
with sword and lance. Hence the Spaniard calls and justly
calls the knife the "bravest of arms" as it wants a man behind
it.

[FN#139] Arab. "Rahim" or "Rihm"=womb, uterine relations, pity
or sympathy, which may here be meant.

[FN#140] Reciting Fátihahs and so forth, as I have described
in the Cemetery of Al-Medinah (ii. 300). Moslems do not pay
for prayers to benefit the dead like the majority of
Christendom and, according to Calvinistic Wahhábi-ism, their
prayers and blessings are of no avail. But the mourner's heart
loathes reason and he prays for his dead instinctively like
the so-termed "Protestant." Amongst the latter, by the bye, I
find four great Sommités, (1) Paul of Tarsus who protested
against the Hebraism of Peter; (2) Mohammed who protested
against the perversions of Christianity; (3) Luther who
protested against Italian rule in Germany, and lastly (4) one
(who shall be nameless) that protests against the whole
business.

[FN#141] Lane transfers this to vol. i. 520 (notes to chapt.
vii); and gives a mere abstract as of that preceding.

[FN#142] We learn from Ibn Batutah that it stood South of the
Great Mosque and afterwards became the Coppersmiths' Bazar.
The site was known as Al-Khazrá (the Green) and the building
was destroyed by the Abbasides. See Defrémery and Sanguinetti,
i. 206.

[FN#143] This great tribe or rather nation has been noticed
before (vol. ii. 170). The name means "Strong," and derives
from one Tamim bin Murr of the race of Adnan, nat. circ. A.D.
121. They hold the North-Eastern uplands of Najd, comprising
the great desert Al-Dahná and extend to Al-Bahrayn. They are
split up into a multitude of clans and septs; and they can
boast of producing two famous sectarians. One was Abdullah bin
Suffár, head of the Suffriyah; and the other Abdullah bin Ibáz
(Ibadh) whence the Ibázíyah heretics of Oman who long included
her princes. Mr. Palgrave wrongly writes Abadeeyah and
Biadeeyah and my "Bayázi" was an Arab vulgarism used by the
Zanzibarians. Dr. Badger rightly prefers Ibáziyah which he
writes Ibâdhiyah (Hist. of the Imams, etc.).

[FN#144] Governor of Al-Medinah under Mu'awiyah and afterwards
(A.H. 64-65=683-4) fourth Ommiade. Al-Siyúti (p. 216) will not
account him amongst the princes of the Faithful, holding him a
rebel against Al-Zubayr. Ockley makes Ibn al-Zubayr ninth and
Marwán tenth Caliph.

[FN#145] The address, without the vocative particle, is more
emphatic; and the P.N. Mu'awiyah seems to court the omission.

[FN#146] This may also mean that the £500 were the woman's
"mahr" or marriage dowry and the £250 a present to buy the
father's consent.

[FN#147] Quite true to nature. See an account of the quasi-
epileptic fits to which Syrians are subject and by them called
Al-Wahtah in "The Inner Life of Syria," i. 233.

[FN#148] Arab. "Wayha-k" here equivalent to Wayla-k. M. C.
Barbier de Meynard renders the first "mon ami" and the second
"misérable."

[FN#149] This is an instance when the article (Al) is
correctly used with one proper name and not with another. Al-
Kumayt (P. N. of poet) lit. means a bay horse with black
points: Nasr is victory.

[FN#150] This anecdote, which reads like truth, is ample set-
off for a cart-load of abuse of women. But even the Hindu,
determined misogynists in books, sometimes relent. Says the
Katha Sarit Sagara: "So you see, King, honourable matrons are
devoted to their husbands, and it is not the case that all
women are always bad" (ii. 624). Let me hope that after all
this Mistress Su'ad did not lead her husband a hardish life.

[FN#151] Al-Khalí'a has been explained in vol. i. 311 {Vol 1,
FN#633}:  the translation of Al-Mas'udi (vi. 10) renders it
"scélerat." Abú Alí al-Husayn the Wag was a Bassorite and a
worthy companion of Abu Nowas the Debauchee; but he adorned
the Court of Al-Amin the son not of Al-Rashid the father.

[FN#152] Governor of Bassorah, but not in Al-Husayn's day

[FN#153] The famous market-place where poems were recited,
mentioned by Al-Hariri.

[FN#154] A quarter of Bassorah.

[FN#155] Capital of Al-Yaman, and then famed for its leather
and other work (vol. v. 16).

[FN#156] The creases in the stomach like the large navel are
always insisted upon. Says the Kathá (ii. 525) "And he looked
on that torrent river of the elixir of beauty, adorned with a
waist made charming by those wave-like wrinkles," etc.

[FN#157] Arab. Sabaj (not Sabah, as the Mac. Edit. misprints
it): I am not sure of its meaning. 

[FN#158] A truly Arab conceit, suggesting

     The music breathing from her face;

her calves moved rhythmically, suggesting the movement and
consequent sound of a musical instrument.

[FN#159] The morosa voluptas of the Catholic divines. The
Sapphist described in the text would procure an orgasm (in
gloria, as the Italians call it) by biting and rolling over
the girl she loved; but by loosening the trouser-string she
evidently aims at a closer tribadism the Arab " Musáhikah."

[FN#160] We drink (or drank) after dinner, Easterns before the
meal and half-Easterns (like the Russians) before and after.
We talk of liquor being unwholesome on an empty stomach; but
the truth is that all is purely habit. And as the Russian
accompanies his Vodka with caviare, etc., so the Oriental
drinks his Raki or Mahayá (Ma al-hayát=aqua vitæ) alternately
with a Salátah, for whose composition see Pilgrimage i. 198.
The Eastern practice has its advantages: it awakens the
appetite, stimulates digestion and, what Easterns greatly
regard, it is economical; half a bottle doing the work of a
whole. Bhang and Kusumbá (opium dissolved and strained through
a pledges of cotton) are always drunk before dinner and thus
the "jolly" time is the preprandial, not the postprandial.

[FN#161] "Abu al-Sakhá" (pronounced Abussakhá) = Father of
munificence.

[FN#162] 'Arab. "Shammara," also used for gathering up the
gown, so as to run the faster.

[FN#163] i.e., blessing the Prophet and all True Believers
(herself included).

[FN#164] The style of this letter is that of a public scribe
in a Cairo market-place thirty years ago.

[FN#165] i.e.. she could not help falling in love with this
beauty of a man.

[FN#166] "Kudrat," used somewhat in the sense of our vague
"Providence." The sentence means, leave Omnipotence to manage
him. Mr. Redhouse, who forces a likeness between Moslem and
Christian theology, tells us that "Qader is unjustly
translated by Fate and Destiny, an old pagan idea abhorrent to
Al-Islam which reposes on God's providence." He makes Kazá and
Kismet quasi-synonymes of "Qazá" and "Qader," the former
signifying God's decree, the latter our allotted portion, and
he would render both by dispensation. Of course it is
convenient to forget the Guarded Tablet of the learned and the
Night of Power and skull-lectures of the vulgar. The eminent
Turkish scholar would also translate Salát by worship (du'á
being prayer) because it signifies a simple act of adoration
without entreaty. If he will read the Opener of the Koran,
recited in every set of prayers, he will find an especial
request to be "led to the path which is straight." These
vagaries are seriously adopted by Mr. E. J. W. Gibb in his
Ottoman Poems (p. 245, etc.) London: Trübner and Co., 1882;
and they deserve, I think, reprehension, because they serve
only to mislead; and the high authority of the source whence
they come necessarily recommends them to many.

[FN#167] The reader will have noticed the likeness of this
tale to that of Ibn Mansúr and the Lady Budúr (vol. iv., 228
et seq.){Vol 4, Tale 42} For this reason Lane leaves it
untranslated (iii. 252).

[FN#168] Lane also omits this tale (iii. 252). See Night
dclxxxviii., vol. vii. p. 113 et seq., for a variant of the
story.

[FN#169] Third Abbaside, A.H. 158-169 (=775-785), and father
of Harun Al-Rashid. He is known chiefly for his
eccentricities, such as cutting the throats of all his
carrier-pigeons, making a man dine off marrow and sugar and
having snow sent to him at Meccah, a distance of 700 miles.

[FN#170] Arab. "Mirt"; the dictionaries give a short shift,
cloak or breeches of wool or coarse silk.

[FN#171] Arab. "Mayázíb" plur. of the Pers. Mizáb (orig.
Míz-i-áb=channel of water) a spout for roof-rain. That which
drains the Ka'abah on the N.-W. side is called Mizáb al-Rahmah
(Gargoyle of Mercy) and pilgrims stand under it for a douche
of holy water. It is supposed to be of gold, but really of
silver gold-plated and is described of Burckhardt and myself.
(Pilgrimage iii. 164.) The length is 4 feet 10 in.; width 9
in.; height of sides 8 in.; and slope at mouth 1 foot 6 in
long.

[FN#172]  The Mac. and Bull Edits. have by mistake "Son of
Ishak." Lane has "Is-hale the Son of Ibrahim" following
Trébutien (iii. 483) but suggests in a note the right reading
as above.

[FN#173] Again masculine for feminine.

[FN#174] There are two of this name. The Upper al-Akik
contains the whole site of Al-Medinah; the Lower is on the
Meccan road about four miles S.W. of the city. The Prophet
called it "blessed" because ordered by an angel to pray
therein. The poets have said pretty things about it, e.g.

     O friend, this is the vale Akik; here stand and strive in
thought:
     If not a very lover, strive to be by love distraught!

for whose esoteric meaning see Pilgrimage ii. 24. I passed
through Al-Akík in July when it was dry as summer dust and its
"beautiful trees" were mere vegetable mummies.

[FN#175] Those who live in the wet climates of the Northern
temperates can hardly understand the delight of a shower in
rainless lands, like Arabia and Nubia. In Sind we used to
strip and stand in the downfall and raise faces sky-wards to
get the full benefit of the douche. In Southern Persia food is
hastily cooked at such times, wine strained, Kaliuns made
ready and horses saddled for a ride to the nearest gardens and
a happy drinking-bout under the cypresses. If a man refused,
his friends would say of him, " See how he turns his back upon
the blessing of Allah!" (like an ass which presents its tail
to the weather).

[FN#176] i.e. the destruction of the Barmecides.

[FN#177] He was Wazir to the Great "Saladin" (Saláh al-Din = one
conforming with the Faith):, ) See vol. iv. 271, where Saladin
is also entitled Al-Malik c al-Nasir = the Conquering King. He
was a Kurd and therefore fond of boys (like Virgil, Horace,
etc.), but that perversion did not prey prevent his being one
of the noblest of men. He lies in the Great Amawi Mosque of
Damascus and I never visited a tomb with more reverence.

[FN#178] Arab. "Ahassa bi'l-Shurbah :" in our idiom "he smelt
a rat".

[FN#179] This and the next tale are omitted by Lane (iii. 254)
on "account of its vulgarity, rendered more objectionable by
indecent incidents." It has been honoured with a lithographed
reprint at Cairo A.H. 1278 and the Bresl. Edit. ix. 193 calls
it the "Tale of Ahmad al-Danaf with Dalílah."

[FN#180] "Ahmad, the Distressing Sickness," or "Calamity;"
Hasan the Pestilent and Dalílah the bawd. See vol. ii. 329,
and vol. iv. 75.

[FN#181] A ftus, a foundling, a contemptible fellow.

[FN#182] In the Mac. Edit. "her husband": the end of the tale
shows the error, infra, p. 171. The Bresl. Edit., x. 195,
informs us that Dalilah was a "Faylasúfiyah"=philosopheress.

[FN#183] Arab. "Ibrík" usually a ewer, a spout-pot, from the
Pers. Ab-ríz=water-pourer: the old woman thus vaunted her
ceremonial purity. The basin and ewer are called in poetry
"the two rumourers," because they rattle when borne about.

[FN#184] Khátún in Turk. is=a lady, a dame of high degree; at
times as here and elsewhere, it becomes a P. N.

[FN#185] Arab. "Maut," a word mostly avoided in the Koran and
by the Founder of Christianity.

[FN#186] Arab. "Akákír," drugs, spices, simples which cannot
be distinguished without study and practice. Hence the proverb
(Burckhardt, 703), Is this an art of drugs?--difficult as the
druggist's craft?

[FN#187] i.e. Beautiful as the fairy damsels who guard
enchanted treasures, such as that of Al-Shamardal (vol. vi.
221).

[FN#188] i.e. by contact with a person in a state of
ceremonial impurity; servants are not particular upon this
point and "Salát mamlúkíyah" (Mameluke's prayers) means
praying without ablution.

[FN#189] i.e. Father of assaults, burdens or pregnancies; the
last being here the meaning.

[FN#190] Ex votos and so forth.

[FN#191] Arab. "Iksah," plaits, braids, also the little gold
coins and other ornaments worn in the hair, now mostly by the
middle and lower classes. Low Europeans sometimes take
advantage of the native prostitutes by detaching these
valuables, a form of "bilking" peculiar to the Nile-Valley.

[FN#192] In Bresl. Edit. Malíh Kawí (pron. 'Awi), a Cairene
vulgarism.

[FN#193] Meaning without veil or upper clothing.

[FN#194] Arab. "Kallakás" the edible African arum before
explained. This Colocasia is supposed to bear, unlike the
palm, male and female flowers in one spathe.

[FN#195] See vol. iii. 302. The figs refer to the anus and the
pomegranates, like the sycomore, to the female parts. Me nec
fæmina nec puer, &c., says Horace in pensive mood.

[FN#196] It is in accordance to custom that the Shaykh be
attended by a half-witted fanatic who would be made furious by
seeing gold and silks in the reverend presence so coyly
curtained.

[FN#197] In English, "God damn everything an inch high!"

[FN#198] Burckhardt notes that the Wali, or chief police
officer at Cairo, was exclusively termed Al-Aghá and quotes
the proverb (No. 156) "One night the whore repented and
cried:--What! no Wali (Al-Aghá) to lay whores by the heels?"
Some of these Egyptian by-words are most amusing and
characteristic; but they require literal translation, not the
timid touch of the last generation. I am preparing, for the
use of my friend, Bernard Quaritch, a bonâ fide version which
awaits only the promised volume of Herr Landberg.

[FN#199] Lit. for "we leave them for the present": the formula
is much used in this tale, showing another hand, author or
copyist.

[FN#200] Arab. "Uzrah."

[FN#201] i.e. "Thou art unjust and violent enough to wrong
even the Caliph!"

[FN#202] I may note that a "donkey-boy" like our "post-boy"
can be of any age in Egypt.

[FN#203] They could legally demand to be recouped but the
chief would have found some pretext to put off payment. Such
at least is the legal process of these days.

[FN#204] i.e. drunk with the excess of his beauty.

[FN#205] A delicate way of offering a fee. When officers
commanding regiments in India contracted for clothing the men,
they found these douceurs under their dinner-napkins. All that
is now changed; but I doubt the change being an improvement:
the public is plundered by a "Board" instead of an individual.

[FN#206] This may mean, I should know her even were my eyes
blue (or blind) with cataract and the Bresl. Edit. ix. 231,
reads "Ayní"=my eye; or it may be, I should know her by her
staring, glittering, hungry eyes, as opposed to the "Hawar"
soft-black and languishing (Arab. Prov. i. 115, and ii. 848).
The Prophet said "blue-eyed (women) are of good omen." And
when one man reproached another saying "Thou art Azrak"
(blue-eyed!) he retorted, "So is the falcon!" "Zurk-an" in
Kor. xx. 102, is translated by Mr. Rodwell "leaden eyes." It
ought to be blue-eyed, dim-sighted, purblind.

[FN#207] Arab, "Zalábiyah bi-'Asal."

[FN#208] Arab. "Ká'ah," their mess-room, barracks.

[FN#209] i.e. Camel shoulder-blade.

[FN#210] So in the Brazil you are invited to drink a copa
d'agua and find a splendid banquet. There is a smack of
Chinese ceremony in this practice which lingers throughout
southern Europe; but the less advanced society is, the more it
is fettered by ceremony and "etiquette."

[FN#211] The Bresl. edit. (ix. 239) prefers these lines:--

     Some of us be hawks and some sparrow-hawks, *
          And vultures some which at carrion pike;
     And maidens deem all alike we be *
          But, save in our turbands, we're not alike.

[FN#212] Arab. Shar a=holy law; here it especially applies to
Al-Kisás=lex talionis, which would order her eye-tooth to be
torn out.

[FN#213] i.e., of the Afghans. Sulaymáni is the Egypt and
Hijazi term for an Afghan and the proverb says "Sulaymáni
harámi"--the Afghan is a villainous man. See Pilgrimage i. 59,
which gives them a better character. The Bresl. Edit. simply
says, "King Sulaymán."

[FN#214] This is a sequel to the Story of Dalilah and both are
highly relished by Arabs. The Bresl. Edit. ix. 245, runs both
into one.

[FN#215] Arab. "Misr" (Masr), the Capital, says Savary,
applied alternately to Memphis, Fostat and Grand Cairo each of
which had a Jízah (pron. Gízah), skirt, angle, outlying
suburb.

[FN#216] For the curious street-cries of old Cairo see Lane
(M. E. chapt. xiv.) and my Pilgrimage (i. 120): here the
rhymes are of Zabíb (raisins), habíb (lover) and labíb (man of
sense).

[FN#217] The Mac. and Bul. Edits. give two silly couplets of
moral advice:--

     Strike with thy stubborn steel, and never fear *
          Aught save the Godhead of Allmighty Might;
     And shun ill practices and never show *
          Through life but generous gifts to human sight.

The above is from the Bresl. Edit. ix. 247.

[FN#218] Arab. "Al-Khanakah" now more usually termed a
Takíyah. (Pilgrim. i. 124.)

[FN#219] Arab. "Ka'b al-ba'íd" (Bresl. Edit. ix. 255)=heel or
ankle, metaph. for fortune, reputation: so the Arabs say the
"Ka'b of the tribe is gone!" here "the far one"=the
caravan-leader.

[FN#220] Arab. "Sharít," from Sharata=he Scarified;
"Mishrat"=a lancet and "Sharítah"=a mason's rule. Mr. Payne
renders "Sharít" by whinyard: it must be a chopper-like 
weapon, with a pin or screw (laulab) to keep the blade open
like the snap of the Spaniard's cuchillo. Dozy explains
it=epée, synonyme de Sayf.

[FN#221] Text "Dimágh," a Persianism when used for the head:
the word properly means brain or meninx.

[FN#222] They were afraid even to stand and answer this
remarkable ruffian.

[FN#223] Ahmad the Abortion, or the Foundling, nephew
(sister's son) of Zaynab the Coneycatcher. See supra, p. 145.

[FN#224] Here the sharp lad discovers the direction without
pointing it out. I need hardly enlarge upon the prehensile
powers of the Eastern foot: the tailor will hold his cloth
between his toes and pick up his needle with it, whilst the
woman can knead every muscle and at times catch a mosquito
between the toes. I knew an officer in India whose mistress
hurt his feelings by so doing at a critical time when he
attributed her movement to pleasure.

[FN#225] Arab. "Hullah"=dress. In old days it was composed of
the Burd or Ridá, the shoulder-cloth from 6 to 9 or 10 feet
long, and the Izár or waistcloth which was either tied or
tucked into a girdle of leather or metal. The woman's
waistcloth was called Nitáh and descended to the feet while
the upper part was doubled and provided with a Tikkah or
string over which it fell to the knees, overhanging the lower
folds. This doubling of the "Hujrah," or part round the waist,
was called the "Hubkah."

[FN#226] Arab. "Taghaddá," the dinner being at eleven a.m. or
noon.

[FN#227] Arab. Ghandúr for which the Dictionaries give only
"fat, thick." It applies in Arabia especially to a Harámi,
brigand or freebooter, most honourable of professions, slain
in foray or fray, opposed to "Fatís" or carrion (the corps
crévé of the Klephts), the man who dies the straw-death.
Pilgrimage iii. 66.

[FN#228] My fair readers will note with surprise how such
matters are hurried in the East. The picture is, however, true
to life in lands where "flirtation" is utterly unknown and,
indeed, impossible.

[FN#229] Arab. "Zabbah," the wooden bolt (before noticed)
which forms the lock and is opened by a slider and pins. It is
illustrated by Lane (M. E. Introduction).

[FN#230] i.e. I am not a petty thief.

[FN#231] Arab. Satl=kettle, bucket. Lat. Situla (?).

[FN#232] i.e. "there is no chance of his escaping." It may
also mean, "And far from him (Hayhát) is escape."

[FN#233] Arab. "Ihtilám" the sign of puberty in boy or girl;
this, like all emissions of semen, voluntary or involuntary,
requires the Ghuzl or total ablution before prayers can be
said, etc. See vol. v. 199, in the Tale of Tawaddud.

[FN#234] This is the way to take an Eastern when he tells a
deliberate lie; and it often surprises him into speaking the
truth.

[FN#235] The conjunctiva in Africans is seldom white; often it
is red and more frequently yellow.

[FN#236] So in the texts, possibly a clerical error for the
wine which he had brought with the kabobs. But beer is the
especial tipple of African slaves in Egypt.

[FN#237] Arab. "Laun", prop.=color, hue; but applied to
species and genus, our "kind"; and especially to dishes which
differ in appearance; whilst in Egypt it means any dish.

[FN#238] Arab. "Zardah"=rice dressed with honey and saffron.
Vol. ii. 313. The word is still common in Turkey.

[FN#239] Arab. "Laylat Arms," the night of yesterday
(Al-bárihah) not our "last night" which would be the night of
the day spoken of.

[FN#240] Arab. "Yakhní," a word much used in Persia and India
and properly applied to the complicated broth prepared for the
rice and meat. For a good recipe see Herklots, Appendix xxix.

[FN#241] In token of defeat and in acknowledgment that she was
no match for men.

[FN#242] This is a neat touch of nature. Many a woman, even of
the world, has fallen in love with a man before indifferent to
her because he did not take advantage of her when he had the
opportunity.

[FN#243] The slightest movement causes a fight at a funeral or
a wedding-procession in the East; even amongst the "mild
Hindus."

[FN#244] Arab. "Al-Musrán" (plur. of "Masír") properly the
intestines which contain the chyle. The bag made by Ali was,
in fact, a "Cundum" (so called from the inventor, Colonel
Cundum of the Guards in the days of Charles Second) or "French
letter"; une capote anglaise, a "check upon child." Captain
Grose says (Class. Dict. etc. s.v. Cundum) "The dried gut of a
sheep worn by a man in the act of coition to prevent venereal
infection. These machines were long prepared and sold by a
matron of the name of Philips at the Green Canister in Half
Moon Street in the Strand * * * Also a false scabbard over a
sword and the oilskin case for the colours of a regiment."
Another account is given in the Guide Pratique des Maladies
Secrètes, Dr. G. Harris, Bruxelles. Librairie Populaire. He
calls these petits sachets de baudruche "Candoms, from the
doctor who invented them" (Littré ignores the word) and
declares that the famous Ricord compared them with a bad
umbrella which a storm can break or burst, while others term
them cuirasses against pleasure and cobwebs against infection.
They were much used in the last century. "Those pretended
stolen goods were Mr. Wilkes's Papers, many of which tended to
prove his authorship of the North Briton, No. 45, April 23,
1763, and some Cundums enclosed in an envelope" (Records of C.
of King's Bench, London, 1763). "Pour finir l'inventaire de
ces curiosités du cabinet de Madame Gourdan, il ne faut pas
omettre une multitude de redingottes appelées d'Angleterre, je
ne sais pourquois. Vous connoissez, an surplus, ces especes de
boucliers qu'on oppose aux traits empoisonnés de l'amour; et
qui n'emoussent que ceux du plaisir." (L'Observateur Anglois,
Londres 1778, iii. 69.) Again we read:--

     "Les capotes mélancoliques
     Qui pendent chez les gros Millan (?)
     S'enflent d'elles-memes, lubriques,
     Et dechargent en se gonflant."
                                Passage Satyrique. 

Also in Louis Prolat:--

     "Il fuyait, me laissant une capote au cul."

The articles are now of two kinds mostly of baudruche (sheep's
gut) and a few of caout-chouc. They are made almost
exclusively in the faubourgs of Paris, giving employment to
many women and young girls; Grenelle turns out the baudruche
and Grenelle and Lilas the India-rubber article; and of the
three or four makers M. Deschamps is best known. The sheep's
gut is not joined in any way but of single piece as it comes
from the animal after, of course, much manipulation to make it
thin and supple; the inferior qualities are stuck together at
the sides. Prices vary from 4 1/2 to 36 francs per gross.
Those of India-rubber are always joined at the side with a
solution especially prepared for the purpose. I have also
heard of fish-bladders but can give no details on the subject.
The Cundum was unknown to the ancients of Europe although
syphilis was not: even prehistoric skeletons show traces of
its ravages.

[FN#245] Arab. "Yá Ustá" (for "Ustáz.") The Pers. term is
Ustád=a craft-master, an artisan and especially a barber. Here
it is merely a polite address.

[FN#246] In common parlance Arabs answer a question (like the
classics of Europe who rarely used Yes and No, Yea and Na