y),
by repeating its last words. They have, however, many
affirmative particles e.g. Ni'am which answers a negative
"Dost thou not go?"--Ni'am (Yes!); and Ajal, a stronger form
following a command, e.g. Sir (go)--Ajal, Yes verily. The
popular form is Aywá ('lláhi)=Yes, by Allah. The chief
negatives are Má and Lá, both often used in the sense of
"There is not."

[FN#247] Arab. "Khalbús," prop. the servant of the Almah-girls
who acts buffoon as well as pimp. The "Maskharah" (whence our
"mask") corresponds with the fool or jester of mediæval
Europe: amongst the Arnauts he is called "Suttari" and is
known by his fox's tails: he mounts a mare, tom-toms on the
kettle-drum and is generally one of the bravest of the corps.
These buffoons are noted for extreme indecency: they generally
appear in the ring provided with an enormous phallus of
whip-cord and with this they charge man, woman and child, to
the infinite delight of the public.

[FN#248] Arab. "Shúbash" pronounced in Egypt Shobash: it is
the Persian Sháh-básh lit.=be a King, equivalent to our bravo.
Here, however, the allusion is to the buffoon's cry at an
Egyptian feast, "Shohbash 'alayk, yá Sáhib al-faraj,"=a
present is due from thee, O giver of the fête " Sec Lane M. E.
xxvii.

[FN#249] Arab. "Ka'ak al-I'd:" the former is the Arab form of
the Persian "Kahk" (still retained in Egypt) whence I would
derive our word "cake." It alludes to the sweet cakes which
are served up with dates, the quatre mendiants and sherbets
during visits of the Lesser (not the greater) Festival, at the
end of the Ramazan fast. (Lane M.E. xxv.)

[FN#250] Arab. "Tásámah," a rare word for a peculiar slipper.
Dozy (s. v.) says only, espece de chaussure, sandale,
pantoufle, soulier.

[FN#251] Arab. "Ijtilá"=the displaying of the bride on her
wedding night so often alluded to in The Nights.

[FN#252] Arab. Khiskhánah; a mixed word from Klaysh=canvass or
stuffs generally and Pers. Khánah=house room. Dozy (s.v.) says
armoire, buffet.

[FN#253] The Bresl. Edit. "Kamaríyah"=Moon-like (fem.) for
Moon.

[FN#254] Every traveller describes the manners and customs of
dogs in Eastern cities where they furiously attack all canine
intruders. I have noticed the subject in writing of Al-Medinah
where the beasts are confined to the suburbs. (Pilgrimage ii.
52-54.)

[FN#255] She could legally compel him to sell her; because,
being an Infidel, he had attempted to debauch a Moslemah.

[FN#256] Arab. "Haláwat wa Mulabbas"; the latter
etymologically means one dressed or clothed. Here it alludes
to almonds, etc., clothed or coated with sugar. See Dozy
(s.v.) "labas."

[FN#257] Arab. "'Ubb" from a root=being long: Dozy (s.v.),
says poche au sein; Habb al-'ubb is a woman's ornament.

[FN#258] Who, it will be remembered, was Dalilah's grandson.

[FN#259] Arab. "Tábút," a term applied to the Ark of the
Covenant (Koran ii. 349), which contained Moses' rod and
shoes, Aaron's mitre, the manna-pot, the broken Tables of the
Law, and the portraits of all the prophets which are to appear
till the end of time--an extensive list for a box measuring 3
by 2 cubits. Europeans often translate it coffin, but it is
properly the wooden case placed over an honoured grave. "Irán"
is the Ark of Moses' exposure, also the large hearse on which
tribal chiefs were carried to earth.

[FN#260] i.e. What we have related is not "Gospel Truth."

[FN#261] Omitted by Lane (iii. 252) "because little more than a
repetition" of Taj al-Mulúk and the Lady Dunyá. This is true;
but the nice progress of the nurse's pimping is a
well-finished picture and the old woman's speech (infra p.
243) is a gem.

[FN#262] Artaxerxes; in the Mac. Edit. Azdashir, a misprint.

[FN#263] I use "kiss ground" as we say "kiss hands." But it
must not be understood literally: the nearest approach would
be to touch the earth with the finger-tips and apply them to
the lips or brow. Amongst Hindus the Ashtánga-prostration
included actually kissing the ground.

[FN#264] The "key" is mentioned because a fee so called
(miftáh) is paid on its being handed to the new lodger.
(Pilgrimage i. 62.)

[FN#265] The Koranic term for semen, often quoted.

[FN#266] Koran, xii. 31, in the story of Joseph, before
noticed.

[FN#267] Probably the white woollens, so often mentioned,
whose use is now returning to Europe, where men have a
reasonable fear of dyed stuffs, especially since Aniline
conquered Cochineal.

[FN#268] Arab. "samír," one who enjoys the musámarah or
night-talk outside the Arab tents. "Samar" is the shade of the
moon, or half darkness when only stars shine without a moon,
or the darkness of a moonless night. Hence the proverb (A. P.
ii. 513) "Má af'al-hú al-samar wa'l kamar;" I will not do it
by moondarkness or by moonshine, i.e. never. I have elsewhere
remarked that "Early to bed and early to rise" is a civilised
maxim; most barbarians sit deep into the night in the light of
the moon or a camp-fire and will not rise till nearly noon.
They agree in our modern version of the old saw:--

     Early to bed and early to rise
     Makes a man surly and gives him red eyes.

The Shayks of Arab tribes especially transact most of their
public business during the dark hours.

[FN#269] Suspecting that it had been sent by some Royal lover.

[FN#270] Arab. "Rubbamá" a particle more emphatic than
rubba,=perhaps, sometimes, often.

[FN#271] "The broken (wall)" from Hatim=breaking. It fences
the Hijr or space where Ishmael is buried (vol. vi. 205); and
I have described it in Pilgrimage iii. 165.

[FN#272] Arab. "Faráis" (plur. of farísah): the phrase has
often occurred and is=our "trembled in every nerve." As often
happens in Arabic, it is "horsey;" alluding to the
shoulder-muscles (not shoulder-blades, Preston p. 89) between
neck and flank which readily quiver in blood-horses when
excited or frightened.

[FN#273] Arab. "Fazl"=exceeding goodness as in "Fazl wa
ma'rifah"=virtue and learning.

[FN#274] Arab. "Al-Mafárik" (plur. of Mafrak),=the pole or
crown of the head, where the hair parts naturally and where
baldness mostly begins.

[FN#275] Arab. "Ná'i al-maut", the person sent round to
announce a death to the friends and relations of the deceased
and invite them to the funeral.

[FN#276] Arab. "Táir al-bayn", any bird, not only the Hátim or
black crow, which announces separation. Crows and ravens flock
for food to the camps broken up for the springtide and
autumnal marches, and thus become emblems of desertion and
desolation. The same birds are also connected with Abel's
burial in the Koran (v. 34), a Jewish tradition borrowed by
Mohammed. Lastly, here is a paranomasia in the words "Ghuráb
al-Bayn"=Raven of the Wold (the black bird with white breast
and red beak and legs): "Ghuráb" (Heb. Oreb) connects with
Ghurbah=strangerhood, exile, and "Bayn" with distance,
interval, disunion, the desert (between the cultivated spots).
There is another and a similar pun anent the Bán-tree; the
first word meaning "he fared, he left."

[FN#277] Arab. "Tayr," any flying thing, a bird; with true
Arab carelessness the writer waits till the tale is nearly
ended before letting us know that the birds are pigeons
(Hamám).

[FN#278] Arab. "Karr'aynan." The Arabs say, "Allah cool thine
eye," because tears of grief are hot and those of joy cool
(Al-Asma'i); others say the cool eye is opposed to that heated
by watching; and Al-Hariri (Ass. xxvii.) makes a scorching
afternoon "hotter than the tear of a childless mother." In the
burning climate of Arabia coolth and refrigeration are
equivalent to refreshment and delight.

[FN#279] Arab. "Muunah," the "Mona" of Maroccan travellers
(English not Italian who are scandalised by "Mona") meaning
the provisions supplied gratis by the unhappy villagers to all
who visit them with passport from the Sultan. Our cousins
German have lately scored a great success by paying for all
their rations which the Ministers of other nations, England
included, were mean enough to accept.

[FN#280] Arab. "Kaannahu huwa"; lit.=as he (was) he. This
reminds us of the great grammarian, Sibawayh, whose name the
Persians derive from "Apple-flavour"(Sib + bú). He was
disputing, in presence of Harun al-Rashid with a rival
Al-Kisá'í, and advocated the Basrian form, "Fa-izá huwa hú"
(behold, it was he) against the Kufan, "Fa-izá huwa iyyáhu"
(behold, it was him). The enemy overcame him by appealing to
Badawin, who spoke impurely, whereupon Sibawayh left the
court, retired to Khorasan and died, it is said of a broken
heart.

[FN#281] This is a sign of the Saudáwí or melancholic
temperament in which black bile pre-dominates. It is supposed
to cause a distaste for society and a longing for solitude, an
unsettled habit of mind and neglect of worldly affairs. I
remarked that in Arabia students are subject to it, and that
amongst philosophers and literary men of Mecca and Al-Medinah
there was hardly one who was not spoken of as a "Saudawi." See
Pilgrimage ii. 49, 50.

[FN#282] i.e. I am a servant and bound to tell thee what my
orders are.

[FN#283] A touching lesson on how bribes settle matters in the
East.

[FN#284] i.e. fresh from water (Arab. "Rutub"), before the air
can tarnish them. The pearl (margarita) in Arab. is Lu'lu';
the "unio" or large pearl Durr, plur. Durar. In modern
parlance Durr is the second quality of the twelve into which
pearls are divided.

[FN#285] i.e. the Wazir, but purposely left vague.

[FN#286] The whole of the nurse's speech is admirable: its
naïve and striking picture of conjugal affection goes far to
redeem the grossness of The Nights.

[FN#287] The bitterness was the parting in the morning.

[FN#288] English "Prin'cess," too often pronounced in French
fashion Princess.

[FN#289] In dictionaries "Bán" (Anglice ben-tree) is the
myrobalan which produces gum benzoin. It resembles the
tamarisk. Mr. Lyall (p. 74 Translations of Ancient Arab
Poetry, Williams and Norgate, 1885), calls it a species of
Moringa, tall, with plentiful and intensely green foliage used
for comparisons on account of its straightness and graceful
shape of its branches. The nut supplies a medicinal oil.

[FN#290] A sign of extreme familiarity: the glooms are the
hands and the full moons are the eyes.

[FN#291] Arab. "Khal'a al-'izár": lit.=stripping off jaws or
side-beard.

[FN#292] Arab. "Shimál"=the north wind.

[FN#293] An operation well described by Juvenal--

     Illa supercilium, modicâ fuligine tactum,
     Obliquâ producit acu, pingitque, trementes
     Attolens oculos.

Sonnini (Travels in Egypt, chapt. xvi.) justly remarks that
this pencilling the angles of the eyes with Kohl, which the
old Levant trade called alquifoux or arquifoux, makes them
appear large and more oblong; and I have noted that the modern
Egyptian (especially Coptic) eye, like that of the Sphinx and
the old figures looks in profile as if it were seen in full.
(Pilgrimage i. 214.)

[FN#294] The same traveller notes a singular property in the
Henna-flower that when smelt closely it exhales a "very
powerful spermatic odour," hence it became a favourite with
women as the tea-rose with us. He finds it on the nails of
mummies, and identifies it with the Kupros of the ancient
Greeks (the moderns call it Kene or Kena) and the           
       (Botrus cypri) of Solomon's Song (i. 14). The Hebr. is
"Copher," a well-known word which the A. V. translates by "a
cluster of camphire (?) in the vineyards of En-gedi"; and a
note on iv. 13 ineptly adds, "or, cypress." The Revised Edit.
amends it to "a cluster of henna-flowers." The Solomonic (?)
description is very correct; the shrub affects vineyards, and
about Bombay forms fine hedges which can be smelt from a
distance.

[FN#295] Hardly the equivalent of the Arab. "Kataba" (which
includes true tattooing with needles) and is applied to
painting "patches" of blue or green colour, with sprigs and
arabesques upon the arms and especially the breasts of women.
"Kataba" would also be applied to striping the fingers with
Henna which becomes a shining black under a paste of honey,
lime and sal-ammoniac. This "patching" is alluded to by Strabo
and Galen (Lane M. E. chapt. ii.); and we may note that
savages and barbarians can leave nothing of beauty unadorned;
they seem to hate a plain surface like the Hindu silversmith,
whose art is shown only in chasing.

[FN#296] A violent temper, accompanied with voies de fait and
personal violence, is by no means rare amongst Eastern
princesses; and terrible tales are told in Persia concerning
the daughters of Fath Ali Shah. Few men and no woman can
resist the temptations of absolute command. The daughter of a
certain Dictator all-powerful in the Argentine Republic was
once seen on horseback with a white bridle of peculiar
leather; it was made of the skin of a man who had boasted of
her favours. The slave-girls suffer first from these masterful
young persons and then it is the turn of the eunuchry.

[FN#297] A neat touch; she was too thorough-bred to care for
herself first.

[FN#298] Here the ground or earth is really kissed.

[FN#299] Corresponding with our phrase, "His heart was in his
mouth."

[FN#300] Very artful is the contrast of the love-lorn
Princess's humility with her furious behaviour, in the pride
of her purity, while she was yet a virginette and fancy free.

[FN#301] Arab. "Suhbat-hu" lit.=in company with him, a popular
idiom in Egypt and Syria. It often occurs in the Bresl. Edit.

[FN#302] In the Mac. Edit. "Shahzamán," a corruption of Sháh
Zamán=King of the Age. (See vol. i. 2)

[FN#303] For a note on this subject see vol. ii. 2.

[FN#304] i.e. bathe her and apply cosmetics to remove ail traces
of travel.

[FN#305] These pretentious and curious displays of coquetry
are not uncommon in handsome slave-girls when newly bought;
and it is a kind of pundonor to humour them. They may also
refuse their favours and a master who took possession of their
persons by brute force would be blamed by his friends, men and
women. Even the most despotic of despots, Fath Ali Shah of
Persia, put up with refusals from his slave-girls and did not,
as would the mean-minded, marry them to the grooms or cooks of
the palace.

[FN#306] Such continence is rarely shown by the young Jallabs or
slave-traders; when older they learn how much money is lost
with the chattel's virginity.

[FN#307] Midwives in the East, as in the less civilised parts of
the West, have many nostrums for divining the sex of the
unborn child.

[FN#308] Arabic (which has no written "g") from Pers. Gulnár
(Gul-i-anár) pomegranate-flower the Gulnare" of Byron who
learnt his Orientalism at the Mekhitarist (Armenian) Convent,
Venice. I regret to see the little honour now paid to the
gallant poet in the land where he should be honoured the most.
The systematic depreciation was begun by the late Mr.
Thackeray, perhaps the last man to value the noble
independence of Byron's spirit; and it has been perpetuated, I
regret to see, by better judges. These critics seem wholly to
ignore the fact that Byron founded a school which covered
Europe from Russia to Spain, from Norway to Sicily, and which
from England passed over to the two Americas. This exceptional
success, which has not yet fallen even to Shakespeare's lot,
was due to genius only, for the poet almost ignored study and
poetic art. His great misfortune was being born in England
under the Gerogium Sidus. Any Continental people would have
regarded him s one of the prime glories of his race.

[FN#309] Arab. "Fí al-Kamar," which Lane renders "in the
moonlight" It seems to me that the allusion is to the Comorin
Islands; but the sequel speaks simply of an island.

[FN#310] The Mac. Edit. misprints Julnár as Julnáz (so the Bul
Edit. ii. 233), and Lane 's Jullanár is an Egyptian vulgarism.
He is right in suspecting the "White City" to be imaginary,
but its sea has no apparent connection with the Caspian. The
mermen and mermaids appear to him to be of an inferior order
of the Jinn, termed Al-Ghawwásah, the Divers, who fly through
air and are made of fire which at times issues from their
mouths.

[FN#311] Arab. "  lá Kulli hál," a popular phrase, like the
Anglo-American " anyhow."

[FN#312] In the text the name does not appear till near the end
of the tale.

[FN#313] i.e. Full moon smiling.

[FN#314] These lines have occurred in vol. iii. 264. so I quote
Lane ii. 499.

[FN#315] 'These lines occurred in vol. ii. 301. I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#316] Arab. "Khadd" = cheek from the eye-orbit to the place
where the beard grows; also applied to the side of a rough
highland, the side-planks of a litter, etc. etc.

[FN#317] The black hair of youth.

[FN#318] This manner of listening is not held dishonourable
amongst Arabs or Easterns generally; who, however, hear as
little good of themselves as Westerns declare in proverb.

[FN#319] Arab. "Hasab wa nasab," before explained as inherited
degree and acquired dignity. See vol. iv. 171.

[FN#320] Arab. "Mujájat"=spittle running from the mouth: hence
Lane, "is like running saliva," which, in poetry is not
pretty.

[FN#321] Arab. and Heb. "Salmandra" from Pers. Samandal (--
dar--duk--dun, etc.), a Salamander, a mouse which lives in
fire, some say a bird in India and China and others confuse
with the chameleon (Bochart Hiero. Part ii. chapt. vi).

[FN#322] Arab. "Mahá" one of the four kinds of wild cows or
bovine antelopes, bubalus, Antelope defassa, A. Ieucoryx, etc.

[FN#323] These lines have occurred in vol. iii. 279; so I quote
Lane (iii. 274) by way of variety; although I do not like his
" bowels."

[FN#324] The last verse (286) of chapt. ii. The Cow:
"compelleth" in the sense of "burdeneth."

[FN#325] Salih's speeches are euphuistic.

[FN#326]  From the Fátihah.

[FN#327] A truly Eastern saying, which ignores the "old maids"
of the West.

[FN#328] i.e naming her before the lieges as if the speaker
were her and his superior. It would have been more polite not
to have gone beyond " the unique pearl and the hoarded jewel
:" the offensive part of the speech was using the girl's name.

[FN#329] Meaning emphatically that one and all were nobodies.

[FN#330] Arab Badr, the usual pun.

[FN#331] Arab. "Kirát" (        ) the bean of the Abrus
precatorius, used as a weight in Arabia and India and as a
bead for decoration in Africa. It is equal to four Kamhahs or
wheat grains and about 3 grs. avoir.; and being the twenty
fourth of a miskal, it is applied to that proportion of
everything. Thus the Arabs say of a perfect man, " He is of
four-and-twenty Kirát" i.e. pure gold. See vol. iii. 239.

[FN#332] The (she) myrtle: Kazimirski (A. de Biberstein)
Dictionnaire Arabe-Francais (Pairs Maisonneuve 1867) gives
Marsín=Rose de Jericho: myrte.

[FN#333] Needless to note that the fowler had a right to
expect a return present worth double or treble the price of
his gift. Such is the universal practice of the East: in the
West the extortioner says, "I leave it to you, sir!"

[FN#334] And she does tell him all that the reader well knows.

[FN#335] This was for sprinkling him, but the texts omit that
operation. Arabic has distinct terms for various forms of
metamorphosis. " Naskh " is change from a lower to a higher,
as beast to man; " Maskh " (the common expression) is the
reverse, " Raskh " is from animate to inanimate (man to stone)
and "Faskh" is absolute wasting away to corruption.

[FN#336] I render this improbable detail literally: it can
only mean that the ship was dashed against a rock.

[FN#337] Who was probably squatting on his shop counter. The
"Bakkál" (who must not be confounded with the épicier), lit.
"vender of herbs" =greengrocer, and according to Richardson
used incorrectly for Baddál ( ?) vendor of provisions.
Popularly it is applied to a seller of oil, honey, butter and
fruit, like the Ital. "Pizzicagnolo"=Salsamentarius, and in
North-West Africa to an inn-keeper.

[FN#338] Here the Shaykh is mistaken: he should have said,
"The Sun in old Persian." "Almanac" simply makes nonsense of
the Arabian Circe's name. In Arab. it is "Takwím," whence the
Span. and Port. "Tacuino:" in Heb. Hakamathá-Takunah=sapientia
dis positionis astrorum (Asiat. Research. iii.120).

[FN#339] i.e. for thy daily expenses.

[FN#340] Un adolescent aime toutes les femmes. Man is by
nature polygamic whereas woman as a rule is monogamic and
polyandrous only when tired of her lover. For the man, as has
been truly said, loves the woman, but the love of the woman is
for the love of the man.

[FN#341] I have already noted that the heroes and heroines of
Eastern love-tales are always bonne fourchettes: they eat and
drink hard enough to scandalise the sentimental amourist of
the West; but it is understood that this abundant diet is
necessary to qualify them for the Herculean labours of the
love night.

[FN#342] Here again a little excision is necessary; the reader
already knows all about it.

[FN#343] Arab. "Hiss," prop. speaking a perception (as of
sound or motion) as opposed to "Hades," a surmise or opinion
without proof.

[FN#344] Arab. "Sawík," the old and modern name for native
frumenty, green grain (mostly barley) toasted, pounded, mixed
with dates or sugar and eaten on journeys when cooking is
impracticable. M. C. de Perceval (iii. 54), gives it a
different and now unknown name; and Mr. Lane also applies it
to "ptisane." It named the " Day of Sawaykah " (for which see
Pilgrimage ii. 19), called by our popular authors the " War of
the Meal-sacks."

[FN#345] Mr. Keightley (H. 122-24 Tales and Popular Fictions,
a book now somewhat obsolete) remarks, "There is nothing said
about the bridle in the account of the sale (infra), but I am
sure that in the original tale, Badr's misfortunes must have
been owing to his having parted with it. In Chaucer's Squier's
Tale the bridle would also appear to have been of some
importance. "He quotes a story from the Notti Piacevoli of
Straparola, the Milanese, published at Venice in 1550. And
there is a popular story of the kind in Germany.

[FN#346] Here, for the first time we find the name of the
mother who has often been mentioned in the story. Faráshah is
the fem. or singular form of "Farásh," a butterfly, a moth.
Lane notes that his Shaykh gives it the very unusual sense of
"a locust."

[FN#347] Punning upon Jauharah= "a jewel" a name which has an
Hibernian smack.

[FN#348] In the old version "All the lovers of the Magic Queen
resumed their pristine forms as soon as she ceased to live;"
moreover, they were all sons of kings, princes, or persons of
high degree.

[FN#349] Arab. "Munádamah," = conversation over the cup
(Lane), used somewhat in the sense of "Musámarah" = talks by
moonlight.

[FN#350] Arab. "Kursi," a word of many meanings; here it would
allure to the square crate-like seat of palm-fronds used by
the Ráwi or public reciter of tales when he is not pacing
about the coffee-house.

[FN#351] Von Hammer remarks that this is precisely the sum
paid in Egypt for a MS. copy of The Nights.

[FN#352] Arab. "Samar," the origin of Musámarah, which see,
vol. iv. 237.

[FN#353] The pomp and circumstance, with which the tale is
introduced to the reader showing the importance attached to
it. Lane, most inudiciously I think, transfers the Proemium to
a note in chapt. xxiv., thus converting an Arabian Night into
an Arabian Note.

[FN#354] 'Asim = defending (honour) or defended, son of Safwán
= clear, cold (dry). Trébutien ii. 126, has Safran.

[FN#355] Fáris = the rider, the Knight, son of Sálih = the
righteous, the pious, the just.

[FN#356] In sign of the deepest dejection, when a man would
signify that he can fall no lower.

[FN#357] Arab. Yá Khawand (in Bresl. Edit. vol. iv. 191) and
fem. form Khawandah (p. 20) from Pers. Kháwand or Kháwandagár
= superior, lord, master; Khudáwand is still used in popular
as in classical Persian, and is universally understood in
Hindostan.

[FN#358] The Biblical Sheba, whence came the Queen of many
Hebrew fables.

[FN#359] These would be the interjections of the writer or
story-teller. The Mac. Edit. is here a sketch which must be
filled up by the Bresl. Edit. vol. iv. 189-318: "Tale of King
Asim and his son Sayf al-Mulúk with Badí'a al-Jamál."

[FN#360] The oath by the Seal-ring of Solomon was the Stygian
"swear" in Fairy-land. The signet consisted of four jewels,
presented by as many angels, representing the Winds, the
Birds, Earth (including sea) and Spirits, and the gems were
inscribed with as many sentences: (1) To Allah belong Majesty
and Might; (2) All created things praise the Lord; (3) Heaven
and Earth are Allah's slaves and (4) There is no god but the
God and Mohammed is His messenger. For Sakhr and his theft of
the signet see Dr. Weil's, "The Bible, the Koran, and the
Talmud."

[FN#361] Trébutien (ii. 128) remarks, "Cet Assaf peut être
celui auquel David adresse plusieurs de ses psaumes, et que
nos interprètes disent avoir été son maître de chapelle (from
Biblioth. Orient).

[FN#362] Mermen, monsters, beasts, etc.

[FN#363] This is in accordance with Eastern etiqette; the
guest must be fed before his errand is asked. The Porte, in
the days of its pride, managed in this way sorely to insult
the Ambassadors of the most powerful European kingdoms and the
first French Republic had the honour of abating the
barbarians' nuisance. So the old Scottish Highlanders never
asked the name or clan of a chance guest, lest he prove a foe
before he had eaten their food.

[FN#364] In Bresl. Edit. (301) Kháfiyah: in Mac. Kháinah, the
perfidy.

[FN#365] So in the Mac. Edit., in the Bresl. only one "Kabá"
or Kaftan; but from the sequel it seems to be a clerical
error.

[FN#366] Arab. "Su'ubán" (Thu'ubán) popularly translated
"basilisk." The Egyptians suppose that when this serpent forms
ring round the Ibn 'Irs (weasel or ichneumon) the latter emits
a peculiar air which causes the reptile to burst.

[FN#367] i.e. that prophesied by Solomon.

[FN#368] Arab. "Takliyah" from kaly, a fry: Lane's Shaykh
explained it as "onions cooked in clarified butter, after
which they are put upon other cooked food." The mention of
onions points to Egypt as the origin of this tale and
certainly not to Arabia, where the strong-smelling root is
hated.

[FN#369] Von Hammer quotes the case of the Grand Vizier Yúsuf
throwing his own pelisse over the shoulders of the Aleppine
Merchant who brought him the news of the death of his enemy,
Jazzár Pasha.

[FN#370] This peculiar style of generosity was also the custom
in contemporary Europe.

[FN#371] Khátún, which follows the name (e.g. Hurmat Khatun),
in India corresponds with the male title Khan, taken by the
Pathan Moslems (e.g. Pír Khán). Khánum is the affix to the
Moghul or Tartar nobility, the men assuming a double
designation e.g. Mirza Abdallah Beg. See Oriental collections
(Ouseley's) vol. i. 97.

[FN#372] Lit. "Whatso thou wouldest do that do!" a contrast
with our European laconism.

[FN#373] These are booths built against and outside the walls,
made of palm-fronds and light materials.

[FN#374] Von Hammer in Trébutien (ii. 135) says, "Such
rejoicings are still customary at Constantinople, under the
name of Donánmá, not only when the Sultanas are enceintes, but
also when they are brought to bed. In 1803 the rumour of the
pregnancy of a Sultana, being falsely spread, involved all the
Ministers in useless expenses to prepare for a Donánmá which
never took place." Lane justly remarks upon this passage that
the title Sultán precedes while the feminine Sultánah follows
the name.

[FN#375] These words (Bresl. Edit.) would be spoken in jest, a
grim joke enough, but showing the elation of the King's
spirits.

[FN#376] A signal like a gong: the Mac. Edit. reads "Tákah," =
in at the window.

[FN#377] Sayf al-Mulúk = "Sword (Egyptian Sif, Arab. Sayf, Gr.
     ) of the Kings"; and he must not be called tout bonnement
Sayf. Sái'd = the forearm.

[FN#378] Arab. "Fakíh" = a divine, from Fikh = theology, a man
versed in law and divinity i.e. (1) the Koran and its
interpretation comprehending the sacred ancient history of the
creation and prophets (Chapters iii., iv., v. and vi.), (2)
the traditions and legends connected with early Moslem History
and (3) some auxiliary sciences as grammar, syntax and
prosody; logic, rhetoric and philosophy. See p. 18 of
"El-Mas'údí's Historical Encyclopædia etc.," By my friend
Prof. Aloys Springer, London 1841. This fine fragment printed
by the Oriental Translation Fund has been left unfinished
whilst the Asiatic Society of Paris has printed in Eight Vols.
8vo the text and translation of MM. Barbier de Meynard and
Pavet de Courteille. What a national disgrace! And the same
with the mere abridgment of Ibn Batutah by Prof. Lee (Orient.
Tr. Fund 1820) when the French have the fine Edition and
translation by Defrémery and Sanguinetti with index etc. in 4
vols. 8vo 1858-59. But England is now content to rank in such
matters as encouragement of learning, endowment of research
etc., with the basest of kingdoms, and the contrast of status
between the learned Societies of London and of Paris, Berlin,
Vienna or Rome is mortifying to an Englishman--a national
opprobrium.

[FN#379] Arab. "Maydán al-Fíl," prob. for Birkat al-Fíl, the
Tank of the Elephant before-mentioned. Lane quotes Al Makrizi
who in his Khitat informs us that the lakelet was made abot
the end of the seventh century (A.H.), and in the seventeenth
year of the eighth century became the site of the stables. The
Bresl. Edit. (iv. 214) reads "Maydan al-'Adl," prob. for
Al-'Ádil the name of the King who laid out the Maydán.

[FN#380] Arab. "Asháb al-Ziyá'," the latter word mostly
signifies estates consisting, strictly speaking of land under
artificial irrigation.

[FN#381] The Bresl. Edit. (iv. 215) has "Chawáshiyah" =
'Chiaush, the Turkish word, written with the Pers. "ch," a
letter which in Arabic is supplanted by "sh," everywhere
except in Morocco.

[FN#382] Arab. "Záwiyah" lit. a corner, a cell. Lane (M. F.,
chapt. xxiv.) renders it "a small kiosque," and translates the
famous Zawiyat al-Umyán (Blind Men's Angle) near the
south-eastern corner of the Azhar or great Collegiate Mosque
of Cairo, "Chapel of the Blind" (chapt. ix.). In popular
parlance it suggests a hermitage.

[FN#383] Arab. "Takht," a Pers. word used as more emphatic
than the Arab. Sarír.

[FN#384] This girding the sovereign is found in the
hieroglyphs as a peculiarity of the ancient Kings of Egypt,
says Von Hammer referring readers to Denon.

[FN#385] Arab. "Mohr," which was not amongst the gifts of
Solomon in Night dcclx. The Bresl. Edit. (p. 220) adds "and
the bow," which is also de trop.

[FN#386] Arab. "Batánah," the ordinary lining opp. to Tazríb,
or quilting with a layer of coton between two folds of cloth.
The idea in the text is that the unhappy wearer would have to
carry his cross (the girl) on his back.

[FN#387] This line has occurred in Night dccxliv. supra p.
280.

[FN#388] Arab. "Mu'attik al-Rikáb" i.e. who frees those in
bondage from the yoke.

[FN#389] In the Mac. Edit. and in Trébutien (ii. 143) the King
is here called Schimakh son of Scharoukh, but elsewhere,
Schohiali = Shahyál, in the Bresl. Edit. Shahál. What the
author means by "Son of 'Ad the Greater," I cannot divine.

[FN#390] Lit. "For he is the man who can avail thereto," with
the meaning given in the text.

[FN#391] Arab. "Jazírat," insula or peninsula, vol. i. 2.

[FN#392] Probably Canton with which the Arabs were familiar.

[FN#393] i.e. "Who disappointeth not those who put their trust
in Him."

[FN#394] Arab. "Al-Manjaníkát" plur. of manjanik, from Gr.
        , Lat. Manganum (Engl. Mangonel from the dim.
Mangonella). Ducange Glossarium, s.v. The Greek is applied
originally to defensive weapons, then to the artillery of the
day, Ballista, catapults, etc. The kindred Arab. form
"Manjanín" is applied chiefly to the Noria or Persian
waterwheel.

[FN#395] Faghfúr is the common Moslem title for the Emperors
of China; in the Kamus the first syllable is Zammated (Fugh);
in Al-Mas'udi (chapt. xiv.) we find Baghfúr and in Al-Idrisi
Baghbúgh, or Baghbún. In Al-Asma'i Bagh = god or idol (Pehlewi
and Persian); hence according to some Baghdád (?) and
Bághistán a pagoda (?). Sprenger (Al-Mas'údi, p. 327) remarks
that Baghfúr is a literal translation of Tien-tse and quotes
Visdelou, "pour mieux faire comprendre de quel ciel ils
veulent parler, ils poussent la généalogie (of the Emperor)
plus loin. Ils lui donnent le ciel pour père, la terre pour
mère, le soleil pour frère aîné et la lune pour sur aînée."

[FN#396] Arab. "Kayf hálak" = how de doo? the salutation of a
Fellah.

[FN#397] i.e. subject to the Maharajah of Hind.

[FN#398] This is not a mistake: I have seen heavy hail in
Africa, N. Lat. 4 degrees; within sight of the Equator.

[FN#399] Arab. "Harrákta." here used in the sense of smaller
craft, and presently for a cock-boat.

[FN#400] See vol. i. 138: here by way of variety I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#401] This explains the Arab idea of the "Old Man of the
Sea" in Sindbad the Seaman (vol. vi. 50). He was not a monkey
nor an unknown monster; but an evil Jinni of the most powerful
class, yet subject to defeat and death.

[FN#402] These Plinian monsters abound in Persian literature.
For a specimen see Richardson Dissert. p. xlviii.

[FN#403] Arab. "Anyáb," plur. of "Náb" = canine tooth
(eye-tooth of man), tusks of horse and camel, etc.

[FN#404] Arab, "Kásid," the Anglo-Indian Cossid. The post is
called Baríd from the Persian "burídah" (cut) because the
mules used for the purpose were dock-tailed. Barid applies
equally to the post-mule, the rider and the distance from one
station (Sikkah) to another which varied from two to six
parasangs. The letter-carrier was termed Al-Faránik from the
Pers. Parwánah, a servant. In the Diwán al-Baríd (Post-office)
every letter was entered in a Madraj or list called in Arabic
Al-Askidár from the Persian "Az Kih dárí" = from whom hast
thou it?

[FN#405] "Ten years" in the Bresl. Edit. iv. 244.

[FN#406] In the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 245) we find "Kalak," a
raft, like those used upon the Euphrates, and better than the
"Fulk," or ship, of the Mac. Edit.

[FN#407] Arab. "Timsah" from Coptic (Old Egypt) Emsuh or Msuh.
The animal cannot live in salt-water, a fact which proves that
the Crocodile Lakes on the Suez Canal were in old days fed by
Nile-water; and this was necessarily a Canal.

[FN#408] So in the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 245). In the Mac. text
"one man," which better suits the second crocodile, for the
animal can hardly be expected to take two at a time.

[FN#409] He had ample reason to be frightened. The large
Cynocephalus is exceedingly dangerous. When travelling on the
Gold Coast with my late friend Colonel De Ruvignes, we
suddenly came in the grey of the morning upon a herd of these
beasts. We dismounted, hobbled our nags and sat down, sword
and revolver in hand. Luckily it was feeding time for the
vicious brutes, which scowled at us but did not attack us.
During my four years' service on the West African Coast I
heard enough to satisfy me that these powerful beasts often
kill me and rape women; but I could not convince myself that
they ever kept the women as concubines.

[FN#410] As we should say in English "it is a far cry to Loch
Awe": the Hindu by-word is, "Dihlí (Delhi) is a long way off."
See vol. i. 37.

[FN#411] Arab. "Fútah", a napkin, a waistcloth, the Indian
Zones alluded to by the old Greek travellers.

[FN#412] Arab. "Yají (it comes) miat khwánjah"--quite Fellah
talk.

[FN#413] As Trébutien shows (ii. 155) these apes were a
remnant of some ancient tribe possibly those of Ád who had
gone to Meccah to pray for rain and thus escaped the general
destruction. See vol. i. 65. Perhaps they were the Jews of
Aylah who in David's day were transformed into monkeys for
fishing on the Sabbath (Saturday) Koran ii. 61.

[FN#414] I can see no reason why Lane purposely changes this
to "the extremity of their country."

[FN#415] Koran xxii. 44, Mr. Payne remarks:--This absurd
addition is probably due to some copyist, who thought to show
his knowledge of the Koran, but did not understand the meaning
of the verse from which the quotation is taken and which runs
thus, "How many cities have We destroyed, whilst yet they
transgressed, and they are laid low on their own foundations
and wells abandoned and high-builded palaces!" Mr. Lane
observes that the words are either misunderstood or purposely
misapplied by the author of the tale. Purposeful perversions
of Holy Writ are very popular amongst Moslems and form part of
their rhetoric; but such is not the case here. According to
Von Hammer (Trébutien ii. 154), "Eastern geographers place the
Bir al-Mu'utallal (Ruined Well) and the Kasr al-Mashíd
(High-builded Castle) in the province of Hadramaut, and we
wait for a new Niebuhr to inform us what are the monuments or
the ruins so called." His text translates puits arides et
palais de plâtre (not likely!). Lane remarks that Mashíd
mostly means "plastered," but here = Mushayyad, lofty,
explained in the Jalálayn Commentary as = rafí'a, high-raised.
The two places are also mentioned by Al-Mas'údi; and they
occur in Al-Kazwíni (see Night dccclviii.): both of these
authors making the Koran directly allude to them.

[FN#416] Arab. (from Pers.) "Aywán" which here corresponds
with the Egyptian "líwán" a tall saloon with estrades.

[FN#417] This naïve style of "renowning it" is customary in
the East, contrasting with the servile address of the
subject--"thy slave" etc.

[FN#418] Daulat (not Dawlah) the Anglo-Indian Dowlat; prop.
meaning the shifts of affairs, hence, fortune, empire,
kingdom. Khátún = "lady," I have noted, follows the name after
Turkish fashion.

[FN#419] The old name of Suez-town from the Greek Clysma (the
shutting), which named the Gulf of Suez "Sea of Kulzum." The
ruins in the shape of a huge mound, upon which Sá'id Pasha
built a Kiosk-palace, lie to the north of the modern town and
have been noticed by me. (Pilgrimage, Midian, etc.) The Rev.
Prof. Sayce examined the mound and from the Roman remains
found in it determined it to be a fort guarding the old mouth
of the Old Egyptian Sweet-water Canal which then debouched
near the town.

[FN#420] i.e. Tuesday. See vol. iii. 249.

[FN#421] Because being a Jinniyah the foster-sister could have
come to her and saved her from old maidenhood.

[FN#422] Arab. "Hájah" properly a needful thing. This
consisted according to the Bresl. Edit. of certain perfumes,
by burning which she could summon the Queen of the Jinn.

[FN#423] Probably used in its sense of a "black crow." The
Bresl. Edit. (iv. 261) has "Khátim" (seal-ring) which is but
one of its almost innumerable misprints.

[FN#424] Here it is called "Tábik" and afterwards "Tábút."

[FN#425] i.e. raising from the lower hinge-pins. See vol. ii.
214.

[FN#426] Arab. "Abrísam" or "Ibrísam" (from Persian Abrísham
or Ibrísham) = raw silk or floss, i.e. untwisted silk.

[FN#427] This knightly practice, evidently borrowed from the
East, appears in many romances of chivalry e.g. When Sir
Tristram is found by King Mark asleep beside Ysonde (Isentt)
with drawn sword between them, the former cried:--

          Gif they weren in sinne
          Nought so they no lay.

And we are told:--

          Sir Amys and the lady bright
               To bed gan they go;
          And when they weren in bed laid,
          Sir Amys his sword out-brayed
          And held it between them two.

This occurs in the old French romance of Amys and Amyloun
which is taken into the tale of the Ravens in the Seven Wise
Masters where Ludovic personates his friend Alexander in
marrying the King of Egypt's daughter and sleeps every night
with a bare blade between him and the bride. See also Aladdin
and his lamp. An Englishman remarked, "The drawn sword would
be little hindrance to a man and maid coming together." The
drawn sword represented only the Prince's honour.

[FN#428] Arab. "Ya Sáki' al-Wajh," which Lane translates by
"lying" or "liar."

[FN#429] Kamín (in Bresl. Edit. "bayn" = between) Al-Bahrayn =
Ambuscade or lurking-place of the two seas. The name of the
city in Lane is "'Emareeych" imaginary but derived from Emarch
('imárah) = being populous. Trébutien (ii. 161) takes from
Bresl. Edit. "Amar" and translates the port-name, "le lieu de
refuge des deux mers."

[FN#430] i.e. "High of (among) the Kings." Lane proposes to
read 'Ali al-Mulk = high in dominion.

[FN#431] Pronounce Mu'inuddeen = Aider of the Faith. The
Bresl. Edit. (iv. 266) also read "Mu'in al-Riyásah" = Mu'in of
the Captaincies.

[FN#432] Arab. "Shúm" = a tough wood used for the staves with
which donkeys are driven. Sir Gardner Wilkinson informed Lane
that it is the ash.

[FN#433] In Persian we find the fuller metaphorical form,
"kissing the ground of obedience."

[FN#434] For the Shaykh of the Sea(-board) in Sindbad the
Seaman see vol. vi. 50.

[FN#435] That this riding is a facetious exaggeration of the
African practice I find was guessed by Mr. Keightley.

[FN#436] Arab. "Kummasra": the root seems to be "Kamsara" =
being slender or compact.

[FN#437] Lane translates, "by reason of the exhilaration
produced by intoxication." But the Arabic here has no
assonance. The passage also alludes to the drunken habits of
those blameless Ethiopians, the races of Central Africa where,
after midday a chief is rarely if ever found sober. We hear
much about drink in England but Englishmen are mere babes
compared with these stalwart Negroes. In Unyamwezi I found all
the standing bedsteads of pole-sleepers and bark-slabs
disposed at an angle of about 20 degrees for the purpose of
draining off the huge pottle-fulls of Pome (Osirian beer)
drained by the occupants; and, comminxit lectum potus might be
said of the whole male population.

[FN#438] This is not exaggerated. When at Hebron I saw the
biblical spectacle of two men carrying a huge bunch slung to a
pole, not so much for the weight as to keep the grapes from
injury.

[FN#439] The Mac. and Bul. Edits. add, "and with him a host of
others after his kind"; but these words are omitted by the
Bresl. Edit. and apparently from the sequel there was only one
Ghul-giant.

[FN#440] Probably alluding to the most barbarous Persian
practice of plucking or tearing out the eyes from their
sockets. See Sir John Malcolm's description of the capture of
Kirmán and Morier (in Zohrab, the hostage) for the wholesale
blinding of the Asterabadian by the Eunuch-King Agha Mohammed
Shah. I may note that the mediæval Italian practice called
bacinare, or scorching with red-hot basins, came from Persia.

[FN#441] Arab. "Laban" as opposed to "Halíb": in Night
dcclxxiv. (infra p. 365) the former is used for sweet milk,
and other passages could be cited. I have noted that all
galaktophagi, or milk-drinking races, prefer the artificially
soured to the sweet, choosing the fermentation to take place
outside rather than inside their stomachs. Amongst the Somal I
never saw man, woman or child drink a drop of fresh milk; and
they offered considerable opposition to our heating it for
coffee.

[FN#442] Arab. "Tákah" not "an aperture" as Lane has it, but
an arched hollow in the wall.

[FN#443] In Trébutien (ii. 168) the cannibal is called "Goul
Eli-Fenioun" and Von Hammer remarks, "There is no need of such
likeness of name to prove that al this episode is a manifest
imitation of the adventures of Ulysses in Polyphemus's cave; *
* * and this induces the belief that the Arabs have been
acquainted with the poems of Homer." Living intimately with
the Greeks they could not have ignored the Iliad and the
Odyssey: indeed we know by tradition that they had
translations, now apparently lost. I cannot however, accept
Lane's conjecture that "the story of Ulysses and Polyphemus
may have been of Eastern origin." Possibly the myth came from
Egypt, for I have shown that the opening of the Iliad bears a
suspicious likeness to the proem of Pentaur's Epic.

[FN#444] Arab. "Shakhtúr".

[FN#445] In the Bresl. Edit. the ship ips not wrecked but
lands Sa'id in safety.

[FN#446] So in the Shah-nameth the Símurgh-bird gives one of
her feathers to her protégé Zál which he will throw into the
fire when she is wanted.

[FN#447] Bresl. Edit. "Al-Zardakhánát" Arab. plur of
Zarad-Khánah, a bastard word = armoury, from Arab. Zarad
(hauberk) and Pers. Khánah = house etc.

[FN#448] Some retrenchment was here found necessary to avoid
"damnable iteration."

[FN#449] i.e. Badi'a al-Jamal.

[FN#450] Mohammed.

[FN#451] Koran xxxv. "The Creator" (Fátir) or the Angels, so
called from the first verse.

[FN#452] In the Bresl. Edit. (p. 263) Sayf al-Muluk drops
asleep under a tree to the lulling sound of a Sákiyah or
water-wheel, and is seen by Badi'a al-Jamal, who falls in love
with im and drops tears upon his cheeks, etc. The scene,
containing much recitation, is long and well told.

[FN#453] Arab. "Lukmah" = a bouchée of bread, meat, fruit or
pastry, and especially applied to the rice balled with the
hand and delicately inserted into a friend's mouth.

[FN#454] Arab. "Saláhiyah," also written Saráhiyah: it means
an ewer-shaped glass-bottle.

[FN#455] Arab. "Sarmújah," of which Von Hammer remarks that
the dictionaries ignore it; Dozy gives the forms Sarmúj,
Sarmúz, and Sarmúzah and explains them by "espèce de guêtre,
de sandale ou de mule, qu'on chausse par-dessus la botte."

[FN#456] In token of profound submission.

[FN#457] Arab. "Misr" in Ibn Khaldún is a land whose people
are settled and civilised hence "Namsur" = we settle; and
"Amsár" = settled provinces. Al-Misrayn was the title of
Basrah and Kufah the two military cantonments founded by
Caliph Omar on the frontier of conquering Arabia and conquered
Persia. Hence "Tamsír" = founding such posts, which were
planted in Mesopotamia, Syria and Egypt. In these camps were
stationed the veterans who had fought under Mohammed; but the
spoils of the East soon changed them to splendid cities where
luxury and learning fluorished side by side. Sprenger
(Al-Mas'údi pp. 19, 177) compares them ecclesiastically with
the primitive Christian Churches such as Jerusalem, Alexandria
and Antioch. But the Moslems were animated with an ardent love
of liberty and Kufah under Al-Hajjaj the masterful, lost
100,000 of her turbulent sons without the thirst for
independence being quenched. This can hardly be said of the
Early Christians who, with the exception of a few
staunch-hearted martyrs, appear in history as pauvres diables
and poules mouillées, ever oppressed by their own most
ignorant and harmful fancy that the world was about to end.

[FN#458] i.e. Waiting to be sold and wasting away in single
cursedness.

[FN#459] Arab. "Yá dádati": dádat is an old servant-woman or
slave, often applied to a nurse, like its congener the Pers.
Dádá, the latter often pronounced Daddeh, as Daddeh Bazm-árá
in the Kuisum-nameh (Atkinson's "Customs of the Women of
Persia," London, 8vo, 1832).

[FN#460] Marjánah has been already explained. D'Herbelot
derives from it the Romance name Morgante la Déconvenue, here
confounding Morgana with Urganda; and Keltic scholars make
Morgain = Mor Gwynn-the white maid (p. 10, Keightley's Fairy
Mythology, London, Whittaker, 1833).










This Etext prepared by Brett Fishburne (william.fishburne@verizon.net)





The Defenders of Democracy:  Contributions from representative men
and women of letters and other arts from our allies and our own
country (President's Edition) 

Edited by The Gift Book Committee of The Militia of Mercy




"The kinship of blood between nations may grow weaker, but the
kinship of ideals and purposes constitutes a permanent bond of
union."  John Lewis Griffiths





The net proceeds of the sale of this book will be used in aiding
the needy families of the men of the Naval Militia who have been
called to the defense of liberty.





Dedication




To our sailors, soldiers, and nurses in appreciation of their
heroism and sacrifice in the cause of Liberty and Democracy.

"Oh, land of ours be glad of such as these."  Theodosia Garrison.

"To such a task we can dedicate our lives and our fortunes, everything
that we are, and everything that we have, with the pride of those
who know that the day has come when America is privileged to spend
her blood and her might for the principles that gave her birth and
happiness, and the peace which she has treasured.  God helping her,
she can do no other."  Woodrow Wilson.





A Message From Vice Admiral William Sowden Sims, U.S.N., Commanding
the American Naval Forces Operating in European Waters




In such an hour as that with which we are now confronted, when so
much depends upon the individual efforts, our hearts swell with
pride as we learn of the thousands of America's best, staunch and
true men who are so willingly forgetting their own personal welfare
and linking their lives and all that they are with the cause of
liberty and justice, which is so dear to the hears of the American
people.  All honor to those who are giving themselves as such willing
sacrifices, and may God grant that their efforts may be speedily
rewarded by a world condition which will make them realize that
their efforts have accomplished the desired result, and that the
world is better and happier because of them.

[signed] Wm. S. Sims





American Expeditionary Force Office of the Commanding General

August 4th, 1917

I am very pleased to have an opportunity to say a word in praise
of the Militia of Mercy.

Unless our women are imbued with Patriotic sentiments, there will
be little to hope for in our life.  A nation is only as great as
its womanhood; and, as are the women, so are the sons.  All praise
to the women of America!

Please accept my very best wishes for the success of your organization.

[signed] John J. Pershing.





Introduction




I have seldom yielded so willingly to a request for my written
views as I do in this instance, when my valued friend, the master
journalist, Melville E. Stone, has asked me, on behalf of the Book
Committee, to write an introduction for "The Defenders of Democracy."
Needless to say, I comply all the more readily in view of the fact
that the book in which these words will appear is planned by the
ladies of the Militia of Mercy as a means of increasing the Fund
the Society is raising for the benefit of the families of "their
own men" on the battle-line.

And what a theme!  It demands a volume from any pen capable of doing
it justice.  For the present purposes, however, I approve strongly
of a compilation which shall express the reasoned opinions of writers
representing the allied nations, while it is a real pleasure to
turn for a few minutes from the day's anxieties and consider the
one great force which supplies the leaven to a war-sodden world.
Are men to live in freedom or as slaves to a soulless system?--that
is the question which is now being solved in blood and agony and
tears on the battlefields of the Old World.  The answer given by
the New World has never been in doubt, but its clarion note was
necessarily withheld in all its magnificent rhythm until President
Wilson delivered his Message to Congress last April.  I have
no hesitation in saying that Mr. Wilson's utterance will become
immortal.  It is a new declaration of the Rights of Man, but
a finer, broader one, based on the sure principles of Christian
ethics.  Yet, mark how this same nobility of thought and purpose
runs like a vein of gold through the rock of valiant little Belgium's
defiance of the Hun, of President Poincare's firm stand, and of Mr.
Lloyd George's unflinching labors in the Sisyphean task of stemming
the Teutonic avalanche.  Prussia's challenge to the world came with
the shock of some mighty eruption undreamed of by chroniclers of
earthquakes.  It stunned humanity.  Nowhere was its benumbing effect
more perceptible than in these United state, whose traditional
policy of non-interference in European disputes was submitted so
unexpectedly to the fierce test of Right versus Expediency.  And
how splendidly did President, Senator, Congress and the People
respond to the test!  Never for one instant did America's clear
judgment falter.  The Hun was guilty, and must be punished.  The
only issue to be solved was whether France, Britain, Italy and
Russia should convict and brand the felon unaided, or the mighty
power of the Western World should join hands with the avengers of
outraged law.  Well, a purblind Germany settled that uncertainty
by a series of misdeeds which no nation of hig