at al-Firdaus (of Paradise), red gold; and (7) Jannat
al-'Adn (of Eden, or Al-Kar r= of everlasting abode, which some
make No. 8), of red pearls or pure musk.  The seven Hells are
given in vol. v. 241; they are intended for Moslems (Jahannam);
Christians (Laz…); Jews (Hutamah); Sabians (Sa'ir); Guebles
(Sakar); Pagans or idolaters (Jahim); and Hypocrites (H wiyah).

[FN#154]  Arab.  "'Atb," more literally= "blame," "reproach."

[FN#155]  Bresl. Edit.  In the Mac.  "it returned to the place
whence I had brought it"--an inferior reading.

[FN#156]  The dreams play an important part in the Romances of
Chivalry, e.g. the dream of King Perion in Amadis de Gaul, chapt.
ii. (London; Longmans, 1803).

[FN#157]  Amongst Moslems bastardy is a sore offence and a
love-child is exceedingly rare.  The girl is not only carefully
guarded but she also guards herself knowing that otherwise she
will not find a husband.  Hence seduction is all but unknown. The
wife is equally well guarded and lacks opportunities hence
adultery is found difficult except in books.  Of the Ibn (or
Walad) Har m (bastard as opposed to the Ibn Hal l) the proverb
says, "This child is not thine, so the madder he be the more is
thy glee!" Yet strange to say public prostitution has never been
wholly abolished in Al-Islam.  Al-Mas'£di tells us that in Arabia
were public prostitutes'(Bagh y ), even before the days of the
Apostle, who affected certain quarters as in our day the
Tart£shah of Alexandria and the Hosh Bardak of Cairo. Here says
Herr Carlo Landberg (p. 57, Syrian Proverbs) "Elles parlent une
langue toute … elle."  So pretentious and dogmatic a writer as
the author of Proverbes et Dictons de la Province de Syrie, ought
surely to have known that the Hosh Bardak is the head-quarters of
the Cairene Gypsies. This author, who seems to write in order to
learn, reminds me of an acute Oxonian undergraduate of my day
who, when advised to take a "coach," became a "coach" himself.

[FN#158]  These lines occur in vol. vii. p. 340. I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#159]  She shows all the semi-maniacal rancour of a good
woman, or rather a woman who has not broken the eleventh
commandment, "Thou shalt not be found out," against an erring
sister who has been discovered.  In the East also these unco'g£id
dames have had, and too often have, the power to carry into
effect the cruelty and diabolical malignity which in London and
Paris must vent itself in scan. mag. and anonymous letters.

[FN#160]  These faintings and trances are as common in the
Romances of Chivalry e.g. Amadis of Gaul, where they unlace the
garments to give more liberty, pour cold water on the face and
bathe the temples and pulses with diluted vinegar (for rose
water) exactly as they do in The Nights.

[FN#161]  So Hafiz, "B d-i-Sab  chu bugzari" etc.

[FN#162]  Arab. "Takiyah." See vol. i. 224 and for the Tarn-Kappe
vol. iv. p. 176. In the Sinth sana Dwatrinsati (vulgo.  Singh san
Battisi), or Thirty-two Tales of a Throne, we find a bag always
full of gold, a bottomless purse; earth which rubbed on the
forehead overcomes all; a rod which during the first watch of the
night furnishes jewelled ornaments; in the second a beautiful
girl; in the third invisibility, and in the fourth a deadly foe
or death; a flower-garland which renders the possessor invisible
and an unfading lotus-flower which produces a diamond every day.

[FN#163]  Arab.  "Judad," plur. of Jadid, lit.= new coin, ergo
applied to those old and obsolete; 10 Judad were= one nusf or
half dirham.

[FN#164]  Arab.  "Raff," a shelf proper, running round the room
about 7-7« feet from the ground.  During my day it was the
fashion in Damascus to range in line along the Raff splendid
porcelain bowls brought by the Caravans in olden days from China,
whilst on the table were placed French and English specimens of
white and gold "china" worth perhaps a franc each.

[FN#165]  Lane supposes that the glass and china-ware had fallen
upon the divan running round the walls under the Raff and were
not broken.

[FN#166]  These lines have occurred in Night dclxxxix. vol. vii.
p. 119. I quote Lane.

[FN#167]  The lines have occurred before.  I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#168]  This formula, I repeat, especially distinguishes the
Tale of Hasan of Bassorah.

[FN#169]  These lines have occurred in vol. 1. 249. I quote Lane.

[FN#170]  She speaks to the "Gallery," who would enjoy a loud
laugh against Mistress Gadabout. The end of the sentence must
speak to the heart of many a widow.

[FN#171]  These lines occur in vol. i. 25: so I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#172]  Arab.  "Mus hikah;" the more usual term for a Tribade
is "Sahikah" from "Sahk" in the sense of rubbing: both also are
applied to onanists and masturbators of the gender feminine.

[FN#173]  i.e. by way of halter.  This jar is like the cask in
Auerbach's Keller; and has already been used by witches; Night
dlxxxvii. vol. vi. 158.

[FN#174]  Here they are ten but afterwards they are reduced to
seven: I see no reason for changing the text with Lane and Payne.

[FN#175]  Wazir of Solomon.  See vol. i. 42; and vol. iii. 97.

[FN#176]  Arab.  "Ism al-A'azam," the Ineffable Name, a
superstition evidently derived from the Talmudic fancies of the
Jews concerning their tribal god, Yah or Yahvah.

[FN#177]  The tradition is that Moh mmed asked Ak f al-Wad 'ah
"Hast a wife?"; and when answered in the negative, "Then thou
appertainest to the brotherhood of Satans!  An thou wilt be one
of the Christian monks then company therewithal; but an thou be
of us, know that it is our custom to marry!"

[FN#178]  The old woman, in the East as in the West, being the
most vindictive of her kind.  I have noted (Pilgrimage iii. 70)
that a Badawi will sometimes though in shame take the blood-wit;
but that if it be offered to an old woman she will dash it to the
ground and clutch her knife and fiercely swear by Allah that she
will not eat her son's blood.

[FN#179]  Neither dome nor fount etc. are mentioned before, the
normal inadvertency.

[FN#180]  In Eastern travel the rest comes before the eating and
drinking.

[FN#181]  Arab.  "'Id" (pron.'Eed) which I have said (vol. i. 42,
317) is applied to the two great annual festivals, the "Fˆte of
Sacrifice," and the "Break-Fast."  The word denotes restoration
to favour and Moslems explain as the day on which Adam (and Eve)
who had been expelled from Paradise for disobedience was
re-established (Uida) by the relenting of Allah.  But the name
doubtless dates amongst Arabs from days long before they had
heard of the "Lord Nomenclator."

[FN#182]  Alluding to Hasan seizing her feather dress and so
taking her to wife.

[FN#183]  Arab.  "Kharaj£"=they (masc.) went forth, a vulgarism
for "Kharajna" (fem.)

[FN#184]  Note the notable housewife who, at a moment when youth
would forget everything, looks to the main chance.

[FN#185]  Arab. "Al-Malak£t" (not "Malk£t" as in Freytag) a Sufi
term for the world of Spirits (De Lacy Christ, Ar. i. 451).
Amongst Eastern Christians it is vulgarly used in the fem. and
means the Kingdom of Heaven, also the preaching of the Gospel.

[FN#186]  This is so rare, even amongst the poorest classes in
the East, that it is mentioned with some emphasis.

[FN#187]  A beauty among the Egyptians, not the Arabs.

[FN#188]  True Fellah--"chaff."

[FN#189]  Alluding to the well-known superstition, which has
often appeared in The Nights, that the first object seen in the
morning, such as a crow, a cripple, or a cyclops determines the
fortunes of the day.  Notices in Eastern literature are as old as
the days of the Hitopadesa; and there is a something instinctive
in the idea to a race of early risers.  At an hour when the
senses are most impressionable the aspect of unpleasant
spectacles ahs double effect.

[FN#190]  Arab.  "Masukah," the stick used for driving cattle,
baton gourdin (Dozy).  Lane applies the word to a wooden plank
used for levelling the ground.

[FN#191]  i.e. the words I am about to speak to thee.

[FN#192]  Arab. "Sahifah," which may mean "page" (Lane) or "book"
(Payne).

[FN#193]  Pronounce, "Abussa'adat" = Father of Prosperities: 
Lane imagines that it came from the Jew's daughter being called
"Sa'adat."  But the latter is the Jew's wife (Night dcccxxxiii)
and the word in the text is plural.  

[FN#194]  Arab.  "Furkh samak" lit. a fish-chick, an Egyptian
vulgarism.

[FN#195]  Arab.  "Al-Rasif"; usually a river-quay, levee, an
embankment.  Here it refers to the great dyke which distributed
the Tigris-water.

[FN#196]  Arab.  "Dajlah," see vol. i, p 180.  It is evidently
the origin of the biblical "Hiddekel" "Hid" = fierceness,
swiftness.

[FN#197]  Arab.  "Bayaz" a kind of Silurus (S. Bajad, Forsk.)
which Sonnini calls Bayatto, Saksatt and Hebede; also Bogar
(Bakar, an ox).  The skin is lubricous, the flesh is soft and
insipid and the fish often grows to the size of a man.  Captain
Speke and I found huge specimens in the Tangany ika Lake.

[FN#198]  Arab.  "Mu'allim," vulg. "M'allim," prop.= teacher,
master esp. of a trade, a craft.  In Egypt and Syria it is a
civil address to a Jew or a Christian, as Hajj is to a Moslem.

[FN#199]  Arab.  "Gharamah," an exaction, usually on the part of
government like a corvee etc.  The Europeo-Egyptian term is
Avania (Ital.) or Avanie (French).

[FN#200]  Arab.  "Sayyib-hu" an Egyptian vulgarism found also in
Syria.  Hence Saibah, a woman who lets herself go (a-whoring)
etc.  It is syn. with "Dashar," which Dozy believes to be a
softening of Jashar; and Jashsh became Dashsh.

[FN#201]  The Silurus is generally so called in English on
account of its feeler-acting mustachios.

[FN#202]  See Night dcccvii, vol. viii. p. 94.

[FN#203]  This extraordinary confusion of two distinct religious
mythologies cannot be the result of ignorance.  Educated Moslems
know at least as much as Christians do, on these subjects, but
the Rawi or story-teller speaks to the "Gallery."  In fact it
becomes a mere 'chaff' and The Nights give some neat specimens of
our modern linguistic.

[FN#204]  See vol. ii. 197.  "Al-Siddikah" (fem.) is a title of
Ayishah, who, however, does not appear to have deserved it.

[FN#205]  The Jew's wife.

[FN#206]  Here is a double entendre.  The fisherman meant a word
or two.  The Jew understood the Shibboleth of the Moslem Creed,
popularly known as the "Two Words,"--I testify that there is no
Ilah (god) but Allah (the God) and I testify that Mohammed is the
Messenger of Allah.  Pronouncing this formula would make the Jew
a Moslem.  Some writers are surprised to see a Jew ordering a
Moslem to be flogged; but the former was rich and the latter was
poor.  Even during the worst days of Jewish persecutions their
money-bags were heavy enough to lighten the greater part, if not
the whole of their disabilities.  And the Moslem saying is, "The
Jew is never your (Moslem or Christian) equal: he must be either
above you or below you."  This is high, because unintentional
praise of the (self-) Chosen People.

[FN#207]  He understands the "two words" (Kalmatani) the Moslem's
double profession of belief; and Khalifah's reply embodies the
popular idea that the number of Moslems (who will be saved) is
preordained and that no art of man can add to it or take from it.

[FN#208]  Arab.  "Mamarr al-Tujjar" (passing-place of the
traders) which Lane renders "A chamber within the place through
which the traders passed."  At the end of the tale (Night
dccxlv.) we find him living in a Khan and the Bresl. Edit. (see
my terminal note) makes him dwell in a magazine (i.e. ground-
floor store-room) of a ruined Khan.

[FN#209]  The text is somewhat too concise and the meaning is
that the fumes of the Hashish he had eaten ("his mind under the
influence of hasheesh," says Lane) suggested to him, etc.

[FN#210]  Arab. "Mamrak" either a simple aperture in ceiling or
roof for light and air or a more complicated affair of lattice-
work and plaster; it is often octagonal and crowned with a little
dome.  Lane calls it "Memrak," after the debased Cairene
pronunciation, and shows its base in his sketch of a Ka'ah (M.E.,
Introduction).

[FN#211]  Arab.  "Kamar."  This is a practice especially amongst
pilgrims.  In Hindostan the girdle, usually a waist-shawl, is
called Kammar-band our old "Cummerbund."  Easterns are too
sensible not to protect the pit of the stomach, that great
ganglionic centre, against sun, rain and wind, and now our
soldiers in India wear flannel-belts on the march.

[FN#212]  Arab.  "Fa-imma 'alayha wa-imma biha," i.e. whether
(luck go) against it or (luck go) with it.

[FN#213]  "O vilest of sinners!" alludes to the thief.  "A
general plunge into worldly pursuits and pleasures announced the
end of the pilgrimage-ceremonies.  All the devotees were now
"whitewashed"--the book of their sins was a tabula rasa: too many
of them lost no time in making a new departure down South and in
opening a fresh account" (Pilgrimage iii. 365).  I have noticed
that my servant at Jeddah would carry a bottle of Raki, uncovered
by a napkin, through the main streets.

[FN#214]  The copper cucurbites in which Solomon imprisoned the
rebellious Jinns, often alluded to in The Nights.

[FN#215]  i.e. Son of the Chase: it is prob. a corruption of the
Persian Kurnas, a pimp, a cuckold, and introduced by way of
chaff, intelligible only to a select few "fast" men.

[FN#216]  For the name see vol. ii.61, in the Tale of Ghanim bin
'Ayyub where the Caliph's concubine is also drugged by the Lady
Aubaydah.

[FN#217]  We should say, "What is this?" etc.  The lines have
occurred before so I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#218]  Zubaydah, I have said, was the daughter of Ja'afar, son
of the Caliph al-Mansur, second Abbaside.  The story-teller
persistently calls her daughter of Al-Kasim for some reason of
his own; and this he will repeat in Night dcccxxxix.

[FN#219]  Arab.  "Shakhs," a word which has travelled as far as
Hindostan.

[FN#220]  Arab.  "Shamlah" described in dictionaries, as a cloak
covering the whole body.  For Hizam (girdle) the Bresl. Edit.
reads "Hiram" vulg. "Ehram," the waist-cloth, the Pilgrim's
attire.

[FN#221]  He is described by Al-Siyuti (p. 309) as "very fair,
tall handsome and of captivating appearance."

[FN#222]  Arab.  "Uzn al-Kuffah" lit. "Ear of the basket," which
vulgar Egyptians pronounce "Wizn," so "Wajh" (face) becomes
"Wishsh" and so forth.

[FN#223]  Arab.  "Bi-fardayn" = with two baskets, lit. "two
singles," but the context shows what is meant.  English Frail and
French Fraile are from Arab.  "Farsalah" a parcel (now esp. of
coffee-beans) evidently derived from the low Lat. "Parcella" (Du
Cange, Paris, firmin Didot 1845).  Compare "ream," vol. v. 109.

[FN#224]  Arab.  "Satur," a kind of chopper which here would be
used for the purpose of splitting and cleaning and scaling the
fish.

[FN#225]  And, consequently, that the prayer he is about to make
will find ready acceptance.

[FN#226]  Arab. "Ruh bila Fuzul" (lit. excess, exceeding) still a
popular phrase.

[FN#227]  i.e. better give the fish than have my head broken.

[FN#228]  Said ironice, a favourite figure of speech with the
Fellah: the day began badly and threatened to end unluckily.

[FN#229]  The penalty of Theft.  See vol. i. 274. 

[FN#230]  This is the model of a courtly compliment; and it would
still be admired wherever Arabs are not "frankified." 

[FN#231]  Arab.  "Shibabah;" Lane makes it a kind of reed-
flageolet.

[FN#232]  These lines occur in vol. i. 76: I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#233]  The instinctive way of juggling with Heaven like our
sanding the sugar and going to church.

[FN#234]  Arab.  "Ya Shukayr," from Shakar, being red (clay,
etc.): Shukar is an anemone or a tulip and Shukayr is its dim.
Form. Lane's Shaykh made it a dim. of "Ashkar" = tawny, ruddy (of
complexion), so the former writes, "O Shukeyr."  Mr. Payne
prefers "O Rosy cheeks."

[FN#235]  For "Sandal," see vol. ii. 50.  Sandali properly means
an Eunuch clean rase, but here Sandal is a P.N. = Sandal-wood.

[FN#236]  Arab.  "Ya mumatil," one who retards payment.

[FN#237]  Arab. "Kirsh al-Nukhal" = guts of bran, a term too
little fitted for the handsome and distinguished Persian.  But
Khalifah is a Fallah-grazioso of normal assurance shrewd withal;
he blunders like an Irishman of the last generation and he uses
the first epithet that comes to his tongue.  See Night dcccxliii.
for the sudden change in Khalifah.

[FN#238]  So the Persian "May your shadow never be less" means, I
have said, the shadow which you throw over your servant. Shade,
cold water and fresh breezes are the joys of life in arid Arabia.

[FN#239]  When a Fellah demanded money due to him by the
Government of Egypt, he was a once imprisoned for arrears of
taxes and thus prevented from being troublesome.  I am told that
matters have improved under English rule, but I "doubt the fact."

[FN#240]  This freak is of course not historical.  The tale-
teller introduces it to enhance the grandeur and majesty of Harun
al-Rashid, and the vulgar would regard it as a right kingly
diversion.  Westerns only wonder that such things could be.

[FN#241]  Uncle of the Prophet: for his death see Pilgrimage ii.
248.

[FN#242]  First cousin of the Prophet, son of Abu Talib, a
brother of Al-Abbas from whom the Abbasides claimed descent.

[FN#243]  i.e. I hope thou hast or Allah grant thou have good
tidings to tell me.

[FN#244]  Arab.  "Nakhuzah Zulayt."  The former, from the Persian
Nakhoda or ship-captain which is also used in a playful sense "a
godless wight," one owning no (na) God (Khuda).  Zulayt = a low
fellow, blackguard.

[FN#245]  Yasamin and Narjis, names of slave-girls or eunuchs.

[FN#246]  Arab.  Tamar-hanna, the cheapest of dyes used ever by
the poorest classes.  Its smell, I have said, is that of newly
mown hay, and is prized like that of the tea-rose.

[FN#247]  The formula (meaning, "What has he to do here?") is by
no means complimentary.

[FN#248]  Arab.  "Jarrah" (pron. "Garrah") a "jar."  See Lane
(M.E. chapt. v.) who was deservedly reproached by Baron von
Hammer for his superficial notices.  The "Jarrah" is of pottery,
whereas the "Dist" is a large copper chauldron and the Khalkinah
one of lesser size.

[FN#249]  i.e. What a bother thou art, etc.

[FN#250]  This sudden transformation, which to us seems
exaggerated and unnatural, appears in many Eastern stories and in
the biographies of their distinguished men, especially students. 
A youth cannot master his lessons; he sees a spider climbing a
slippery wall and after repeated falls succeeding.  Allah opens
the eyes of his mind, his studies become easy to him, and he ends
with being an Allamah (doctissimus).

[FN#251]  Arab.  "Bismillah, Nami!" here it is not a blessing,
but a simple invitation, "Now please go to sleep."

[FN#252]  The modern inkcase of the Universal East is a lineal
descendant of the wooden palette with writing reeds.  See an
illustration of that of "Amasis, the good god and lord of the two
lands" (circ. B.C. 1350) in British Museum (p. 41, "The Dwellers
on the Nile," by E. A. Wallis Bridge, London, 56, Paternoster
Row, 1885).

[FN#253]  This is not ironical, as Lane and Payne suppose, but a
specimen of inverted speech--Thou art in luck this time!

[FN#254]  Arab.  "Marhub" = terrible:  Lane reads "Mar'ub" =
terrified.  But the former may also mean, threatened with
something terrible.

[FN#255]  i.e. in Kut al-Kulub.

[FN#256]  Lit. to the son of thy paternal uncle, i.e. Mohammed.

[FN#257]  In the text he tells of the whole story beginning with
the eunuch and the hundred dinars, the chest, etc.: but -- "of no
avail is a twice-told tale."

[FN#258]  Koran xxxix. 54.  I have quoted Mr. Rodwell who affects
the Arabic formula, omitting the normal copulatives.

[FN#259]  Easterns find it far easier to "get the chill of
poverty out of their bones" than Westerns.

[FN#260]  Arab.  "Dar al-Na'im."  Name of one of the seven stages
of the Moslem heaven.  This style of inscription dates from the
days of the hieroglyphs.  A papyrus describing the happy town of
Raamses ends with these lines.--

     Daily is there a supply of food:
     Within it gladness doth ever brood
     *              *               *               *
     Prolonged, increased; abides there Joy, etc., etc.

[FN#261]  Arab.  "Ansar" = auxiliaries, the men of Al-Medinah
(Pilgrimage ii. 130, etc.).

[FN#262]  Arab.  "Ashab" = the companions of the Prophet who may
number 500 (Pilgrimage ii. 81, etc.).

[FN#263]  Arab. "H silah" prob. a corner of a "Godown" in some
Khan or Caravanserai.

[FN#264]  Arab. "Funduk" from the Gr.           , whence the
Italian Fondaco e.g. at Venice the Fondaco de' Turchi.

[FN#265]  Arab. "Ast r" plur. of Satr: in the Mac. Edit. S t£r,
both (says Dozy) meaning "Couperet" (a hatchet). Habicht
translates it "a measure for small fish," which seems to be a
shot and a bad shot as the text talks only of means of carrying
fish. Nor can we accept Dozy's emendation Ast l (plur. of Satl)
pails, situlae. In Petermann's Reisen (i. 89) Satr=assiette.

[FN#266]  Which made him expect a heavy haul.

[FN#267]  Arab. "Urk£b" = tendon Achilles in man hough or pastern
in beast, etc. It is held to be an incrementative form of 'Akab
(heel); as Kur'£b of Ka'b (heel) and Khurt£m of Khatm (snout).

[FN#268]  Arab. "Karm£t" and "Zakz£k." The former (pronounced
Garm£t) is one of the many Siluri (S. Carmoth Niloticus) very
common and resembling the Sh l. It is smooth and scaleless with
fleshy lips and soft meat and as it haunts muddy bottoms it was
forbidden to the Ancient Egyptians. The Zakz£k is the young of
the Sh l (Synodontis Schal: Seetzen); its plural form Zak zik
(pronounced Zig zig) gave a name to the flourishing town which
has succeeded to old Bubastis and of which I have treated in
"Midian" and "Midian Revisited."

[FN#269]  "Y  A'awar"=O one-eye! i.e.. the virile member. So the
vulgar insult "Ya ibn al-aur" (as the vulgar pronounce it) "O son
of a yard!" When AlMas'£di writes (Fr. Trans. vii. 106), "Udkhul
usbu'ak fi aynih," it must not be rendered "Il faut lui faire
violence": thrust thy finger into his eye ('Ayn) means "put thy
penis up his fundament!" ('Ayn being=Dubur). The French remarks,
"On en trouverait l'‚quivalent dans les bas-fonds de notre
langue," So in English "pig's eye," "blind eye," etc.

[FN#270]  Arab. "Nabb£t"=a quarterstaff: see vol. i. 234.

[FN#271]  Arab. "Banni," vulg. Benni and in Lane (Lex. Bunni) the
Cyprinus Bynni (Forsk.), a fish somewhat larger than a barbel
with lustrous silvery scales and delicate flesh, which Sonnini
believes may be the "Lepidotes" (smooth-scaled) mentioned by
Athenaeus. I may note that the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 332) also
affects the Egyptian vulgarism "Farkh-Banni" of the Mac. Edit.
(Night dcccxxxii.).

[FN#272]  The story-teller forgets that Khalif had neither basket
nor knife.

[FN#273]  Arab. "Rayh n" which may here mean any scented herb.

[FN#274]  In the text "Fard Kalmah," a vulgarism. The Mac. Edit.
(Night dcccxxxv.) more aptly says, "Two words" (Kalmat ni, vulg.
Kalmatayn) the Twofold Testimonies to the Unity of Allah and the
Mission of His Messenger.

[FN#275]  The lowest Cairene chaff which has no respect for
itself or others.

[FN#276]  Arab. "Karrat azl  h£": alluding to the cool skin of
healthy men when digesting a very hearty meal.

[FN#277]  This is the true Fellah idea. A peasant will go up to
his proprietor with the "rint" in gold pieces behind his teeth
and undergo an immense amount of flogging before he spits them
out. Then he will return to his wife and boast of the number of
sticks he has eaten instead of paying at once and his spouse will
say, "Verily thou art a man." Europeans know nothing of the
Fellah. Napoleon Buonaparte, for political reasons, affected
great pity for him and horror of his oppressors, the Beys and
Pashas; and this affectation gradually became public opinion. The
Fellah must either tyrannise or be tyrannised over; he is never
happier than under a strong-handed despotism and he has never
been more miserable than under British rule, or rather, misrule.
Our attempts to constitutionalise him have made us the
laughing-stock of Europe.

[FN#278]  The turban is a common substitute for a purse with the
lower classes of Egyptians; and an allusion to the still popular
practice of turban-snatching will be found in vol. i. p. 259.

[FN#279]  Arab. "S lih," a devotee; here, a naked Dervish.

[FN#280]  Here Khalif is made a conspicuous figure in Baghdad
like Boccaccio's Calandrino and Co. He approaches in type the old
Irishman now extinct, destroyed by the reflux action Of
Anglo-America (U.S.) upon the miscalled "Emerald Isle." He
blunders into doing and saying funny things whose models are the
Hibernian "bulls" and acts purely upon the impulse of the moment,
never reflecting till (possibly) after all is over.

[FN#281]  Arab. "Kayl£lah," explained in vol. i. 51.

[FN#282]  i.e. thy bread lawfully gained. The "Baww k"
(trumpeter) like the "Zamm r" (piper of the Mac. Edit.) are
discreditable craftsmen, associating with Almahs and loose women
and often serving as their panders.

[FN#283]  i.e. he was indecently clad. Man's "shame" extends from
navel to knees. See vol vi. 30.

[FN#284]  Rashid would be=garden-cresses or stones: Rashid the
heaven-directed.

[FN#285]  Arab. "Uff 'alayka"=fie upon thee! Uff=lit. Sordes
Aurium and Tuff (a similar term of disgust)=Sordes unguinum. To
the English reader the blows administered to Khalif appear rather
hard measure. But a Fellah's back is thoroughly broken to the
treatment and he would take ten times as much punishment for a
few piastres.

[FN#286]  Arab. "Zurayk" dim. of Azrak=blue-eyed. See vol. iii.
104.

[FN#287]  Of Baghdad.

[FN#288]  Arab. "H sil," i.e. cell in a Khan for storing goods:
elsewhere it is called a Makhzan (magazine) with the same sense.

[FN#289]  The Bresl. text (iv. 347) abbreviates, or rather omits;
so that in translation details must be supplied to make sense.

[FN#290]  Arab. "Kam n," vulgar Egyptian, a contraction from
Kama' (as) + anna (since, because). So " Kam n shuwayh"=wait a
bit; " Kam n marrah"=once more and "Wa Karm na-ka"=that is why.

[FN#291]  i.e. Son of the Eagle: See vol. iv. 177. Here, however,
as the text shows it is hawk or falcon. The name is purely
fanciful and made mnemonically singular.

[FN#292]  The Egyptian Fellah knows nothing of boxing like the
Haus  man; but he is fond of wrestling after a rude and
uncultivated fashion, which would cause shouts of laughter in
Cumberland and Cornwall. And there are champions in this line,
See vol. iii. 93.

[FN#293]  The usual formula. See vol. ii. 5.

[FN#294]  As the Fellah still does after drinking a cuplet
("fing n" he calls it) of sugared coffee.

[FN#295]  He should have said "white," the mourning colour under
the Abbasides.

[FN#296]  AnglicŠ, "Fine feathers make fine birds"; and in
Eastern parlance, "Clothe the reed and it will become a bride."
(Labbis al-B£sah tabki 'Ar£sah, Spitta Bey, No. 275.) I must
allow myself a few words of regret for the loss of this Savant,
one of the most singleminded men known to me. He was vilely
treated by the Egyptian Government, under the rule of the
Jew-Moslem Riy z; and, his health not allowing him to live in
Austria, he died shortly after return home.

[FN#297]  Arab. " Saub (Tobe) 'At bi": see vol. iii. 149.

[FN#298]  In text "Kimkh ," which Dozy also gives Kumkh=chenille,
tissu de soie veloutee: DamasquŠte de soie or et argent de
Venise, du Levant , … fleurs, etc. It comes from Kamkh b or
Kimkh b, a cloth of gold, the well-known Indian "Kimcob."

[FN#299]  Here meaning=Enter in Allah's name!

[FN#300]  The Arabs have a saying, "Wine breeds gladness, music
merriment and their offspring is joy."

[FN#301]  Arab. "Jokh al-Sakl t," rich kind of brocade on
broadcloth.

[FN#302]  Arab. "Hanab t," which Dozy derives from O. German
Hnapf, Hnap now Napf: thence too the Lat. Hanapus and Hanaperium:
Ital. Anappo, Nappo; Provenc. Enap and French and English
"Hanap"= rich bowl, basket, bag. But this is known even to the
dictionaries.

[FN#303]  Arab. " Kir m," nobles, and " Kur£m," vines, a word
which appears in Carmel=Karam-El (God's vineyard).

[FN#304]  Arab. "Sul f al-Khandarisi," a contradiction. Sul f=the
ptisane of wine. Khandarisi, from Greek        , lit. gruel,
applies to old wine.

[FN#305]  i.e. in bridal procession.

[FN#306]  Arab. "Al-'Ar£s, one of the innumerable tropical names
given to wine by the Arabs. Mr. Payne refers to Grangeret de la
Grange, Anthologie Arabe, p, 190.

[FN#307]  Here the text of the Mac. Edition is resumed.

[FN#308]  i.e. "Adornment of (good) Qualities." See the name
punned on in Night dcccli. Lane omits this tale because it
contains the illicit "Amours of a Christian and a Jewess who
dupes her husband in various abominable ways." The text has been
taken from the Mac. and the Bresl. Edits. x. 72 etc. In many
parts the former is a mere Epitome.

[FN#309]  The face of her who owns the garden.

[FN#310]  i.e. I am no public woman.

[FN#311]  i.e. with the sight of the garden and its mistress--
purposely left vague.

[FN#312]  Arab. "D dat." Night dcclxxvi. vol. vii. p. 372.

[FN#313]  Meaning respectively "Awaking" (or blowing hard),
"Affairs" (or Misfortunes) and "Flowing" (blood or water). They
are evidently intended for the names of Jewish slave-girls.

[FN#314]  i.e. the brow-curls, or accroche-coeurs. See vol. i.
168.

[FN#315]  Arab. "Wish h" usually applied to woman's broad belt,
stomacher (Al-Hariri Ass. af Rayy).

[FN#317]  The old Greek "Stephane."

[FN#317]  Alluding to the popular fancy of the rain-drop which
becomes a pearl.

[FN#318]  Arab. "Gh zi"=one who fights for the faith.

[FN#319]  i.e. people of different conditions.

[FN#320]  The sudden change appears unnatural to Europeans; but
an Eastern girl talking to a strange man in a garden is already
half won. The beauty, however, intends to make trial of her
lover's generosity before yielding.

[FN#321]  These lines have occurred in the earlier part of the
Night: I quote Mr. Payne for variety.

[FN#322]  Arab. "Al-Sh h m t"=the King is dead, Pers. and Arab.
grotesquely mixed: Europeans explain "Checkmate" in sundry ways,
all more or less wrong.

[FN#323]  Cheating (Ghadr) is so common that Easterns who have no
tincture of Western civilisation look upon it not only as venial
but laudable when one can take advantage of a simpleton. No idea
of "honour" enters into it. Even in England the old lady
whist-player of the last generation required to be looked after
pretty closely--if Mr. Charles Dickens is to be trusted.

[FN#324]  Arab. "Al-Gh liyah," whence the older English Algallia.
See vol. i., 128. The Voyage of Linschoten, etc. Hakluyt Society
MDCCCLXXXV., with notes by my learned friend the late Arthur Coke
Burnell whose early death was so sore a loss to Oriental
students.

[FN#325]  A favourite idiom, "What news bringest thou?" ("O
As m!" Arab. Prov. ii. 589) used by H ris bin Amr£, King of
Kindah, to the old woman As m whom he had sent to inspect a girl
he purposed marrying.

[FN#326]  Amongst the Jews the Arab Sal m becomes "Shal£m" and a
Jewess would certainly not address this ceremonial greeting to a
Christian. But Eastern storytellers care little for these
minutiae; and the "Adornment of Qualities," was not by birth a
Jewess as the sequel will show.

[FN#327]  Arab. "S lifah," the silken plaits used as adjuncts.
See vol. iii, 313.

[FN#328]  I have translated these lines in vol. i. 131, and
quoted Mr. Torrens in vol. iv. 235. Here I borrow from Mr. Payne.

[FN#329]  Mr. Payne notes:--Apparently some place celebrated for
its fine bread, as Gonesse in seventeenth-century France. It
occurs also in Bresl. Edit. (iv. 203) and Dozy does not
understand it. But Arj the root=good odour.

[FN#330]  Arab. "T s," from Pers. T sah. M. Charbonneau a
Professor of Arabic at Constantine and Member of the Asiatic Soc.
Paris, who published the Histoire de Chams-Eddine et Nour-Eddine
with Maghrabi punctuation (Paris, Hachette, 1852) remarks the
similarity of this word to Tazza and a number of other whimsical
coincidences as Zauj, {Greek letters} jugum; Ink r, negare;
matrah, matelas; Ishtir , acheter, etc. To which I may add wasat,
waist; zabad, civet; B s, buss (kiss); uzrub (pron. Zrub), drub;
Kat', cut; Tarik, track; etc., etc.

[FN#331]  We should say "To her (I drink)" etc.

[FN#332]  This is ad captandum. The lovers becoming Moslems would
secure the sympathy of the audience. In the sequel (Night
dccclviii) we learn that the wilful young woman was a born
Moslemah who had married a Jew but had never Judaized.

[FN#333]  The doggerel of this Kasidah is not so phenomenal as
some we have seen.

[FN#334]  Arab. "'Andam"=Brazil wood, vol. iii. 263.

[FN#335]  Arab. " Him…." See supra, p. 102.

[FN#336]  i.e. her favours were not lawful till the union was
sanctified by heartwhole (if not pure) love.

[FN#337]  Arab. "Mans£r wa munazzam=oratio soluta et ligata.

[FN#338]  i.e. the cupbearers.

[FN#339]  Which is not worse than usual.

[FN#340]  i.e. "Ornament of Qualities."

[FN#341]  The 'Akik, a mean and common stone, ranks high in
Moslem poetry on account of the saying of Mohammed recorded by
Ali and Ayishah "Seal with seals of Carnelian." ('Akik.)

[FN#342]  See note ii. at the end of this volume.

[FN#343]  Arab. "Mahall" as opposed to the lady's "Manzil," which
would be better "Mak m." The Arabs had many names for their old
habitations, e.g.; Kubbah, of brick; Sutrah, of sun-dried mud;
Hazirah, of wood; Tir f, a tent of leather; Khab a, of wool;
Kash'a, of skins; Nakh d, of camel's or goat's hair; Khaymah, of
cotton cloth; Wabar, of soft hair as the camel's undercoat and
Fust t (the well-known P.N.) a tent of horsehair or any hair
(Sha'ar) but Wabar.

[FN#344]  This is the Maghribi form of the Arab. S£k=a
bazar-street, known from Tanjah (Tangiers) to Timbuctoo.

[FN#345]  Arab. "Walimah" usually=a wedding-feast. According to
the learned Nasif alYazaji the names of entertainments are as
follows: Al-Jafal…=a general invitation, opp. to Al-Nakar…,
especial; Khurs, a childbirth feast; 'Akikah, when the boy-babe
is first shaved; A'z r=circumcision-feast; Hiz k, when the boy
has finished his perlection of the Koran; Mil k, on occasion of
marriage-offer; Wazimah, a mourning entertainment; Wakirah=a
"house-warming"; Naki'ah, on returning from wayfare; 'Akirah, at
beginning of the month Rajab; Kir…=a guest-feast and Maadubah, a
feast for other cause; any feast.

[FN#346]  Arab. "Anistan " the pop. phrase=thy company gladdens
us.

[FN#347]  Here "Mu kh t" or making mutual brotherhood would
be=entering into a formal agreement for partnership. For the
forms of "making brotherhood," see vol. iii. 15.

[FN#348]  Arab. "Ish rah" in classical Arab. signs with the
finger (beckoning); Aum  with the hand; Ramz, with the lips;
Khalaj, with the eyelids (wink); and Ghamz with the eye. Aum z is
a furtive glance, especially of women, and Ilh z, a side-glance
from lahaza, limis oculis intuitus est. See Preston's Al-Hariri,
p. 181.

[FN#349]  Arab. "Haudaj" (Hind. Haudah, vulg.
Howda=elephant-saddle), the women's camel-litter, a cloth
stretched over a wooden frame. See the Prize-poem of Lebid, v.
12.

[FN#350]  i.e. the twelve days' visit.

[FN#351]  See note, vol. vii. 267. So Dryden (Virgil):--

          "And the hoarse raven on the blasted bough
          By croaking to the left presaged the coming blow."

And Gay (Fable xxxvii.),

          "That raven on the left-hand oak,
          Curse on his ill-betiding croak!"

In some Persian tales two crows seen together are a good omen.

[FN#352]  Vulgar Moslems hold that each man's fate is written in
the sutures of his skull but none can read the lines. See vol.
iii. 123.

[FN#353]  i.e. cease not to bemoan her lot whose moon-faced
beloved ones are gone.

[FN#354]  Arab. "Rukb" used of a return caravan; and also meaning
travellers on camels. The vulgar however apply "R kib" (a
camel-rider) to a man on horseback who is properly F ris plur.
"Khayy lah," while "Khayy l" is a good rider. Other names are
"Fayy l" (elephant-rider), Baghgh l (mule-rider) and Hamm r
(donkeyrider).

[FN#355]  A popular exaggeration. See vol. i. 117

[FN#356]  Lit. Empty of tent-ropes (Atn b).

[FN#357]  Arab. "'Abir," a fragrant powder sprinkled on face,
body and clothes. In India it is composed of rice flower or
powdered bark of the mango, Deodar (uvaria longifolia),
Sandalwood, lign-aloes or curcuma (zerumbat or zedoaria) with
rose-flowers, camphor, civet and anise-seed. There are many of
these powders: see in Herklots Chiks , Phul, Ood, Sundul, Uggur,
and Urgujja.

[FN#358]  i.e. fair faced boys and women. These lines are from
the Bresl. Edit. x. 160.

[FN#359]  i.e. the Chief Kazi. For the origin of the Office and
title see vol. ii. 90, and for the Kazi al-Arab who administers
justice among the Badawin see Pilgrimage iii. 45.

[FN#360]  Arab. "Raas al-M l"=capital, as opposed to Rib  or
Ribh=interest. This legal expression has been adopted by all
Moslem races.

[FN#361]  Our Aden which is thus noticed by Abulfeda (A.D. 1331):
"Aden in the lowlands of Teh mah * * * also called Abyana from a
man (who found it?), built upon the seashore, a station (for land
travellers) and a sailing-place for merchant ships India-bound,
is dry and sunparcht (Kashifah, squalid, scorbutic) and sweet
water must be imported. * * * It lies 86 parasangs from San'  but
Ibn Haukal following the travellers makes it three stages. The
city, built on the skirt of a wall-like mountain, has a watergate
and a landgate known as Bab al-S kayn. But 'Adan L 'ah (the
modest, the timid, the less known as opposed to Abyan, the better
known?) is a city in the mountains of Sabir, Al-Yaman, whence
issued the supporters of the Fatimite Caliphs of Egypt." 'Adan
etymologically means in Arab. and Heb. pleasure ({Greek
letters}), Eden (the garden), the Heaven in which spirits will
see Allah and our "Coal-hole of the East," which we can hardly
believe ever to have been an Eden. Mr. Badger who supplied me
with this note described the two Adens in a paper in Ocean
Highways, which he cannot now find. In the 'Aj ib al-Makhl£k t,
Al-Kazwini (ob. A.D. 1275) derives the name from Ibn Sin n bin
Ibrahim; and is inclined there to place the Bir al-Mu'attal
(abandoned well) and the Kasr alMashid (lofty palace) of Koran
xxii. 44; and he adds "Kasr al-Misyad" to those mentioned in the
tale of Sayf al-Mul£k and Badi'a al-Jam l.

[FN#362]  Meaning that she had been carried to the Westward of
Meccah.

[FN#363]  Arab. "Zahrawiyah" which contains a kind of double
entendre. F timah the Prophet's only daughter is entitled
Al-Zahr  the "bright-blooming"; and this is also an epithet of
Zohrah the planet Venus. For Fatimah see vol. vi. 145. Of her
Mohammed said, "Love your daughters, for I too am a father of
daughters" and, "Love them, they are the comforters, the
dearlings." The Lady appears in Moslem history a dreary young
woman (died aet. 28) who made this world, like Honorius, a hell
in order to win a next-world heaven. Her titles are Zahr  and
Bat£l (Pilgrimage ii. 90) both signifying virgin. Burckhardt
translates Zahr  by "bright blooming" (the etymological sense):
it denotes literally a girl who has not menstruated, in which
state of purity the Prophet's daughter is said to have lived and
died. "Bat£l" has the sense of a "clean maid" and is the title
given by Eastern Christians to the Virgin Mary. The perpetual
virginity of Fatimah even after motherhood (Hasan and Husayn) is
a point of orthodoxy in Al-Islam as Juno's with the Romans and
Um 's with the Hind£ worshippers of Shiva. During her life
Mohammed would not allow Ali a second wife, and he held her one
of the four perfects, the other three being Asia wife of
"Pharaoh," the Virgin Mary and Khadijah his own wife. She caused
much scandal after his death by declaring that he had left her
the Fadak estate (Abulfeda I, 133, 273) a castle with a fine
palmorchard near Khaybar. Abu Bakr dismissed the claim quoting
the Apostle's Hadis, "We prophets are folk who will away nothing:
what we leave is alms-gift to the poor," and Shi'ahs greatly
resent his decision. (See Dabistan iii. 51 52 for a different
rendering of the words.) I have given the popular version of the
Lady Fatimah's death and burial (Pilgrimage ii. 315) and have
remarked that Moslem historians delight in the obscurity which
hangs over her last resting-place, as if it were an honour even
for the receptacle of her ashes to be concealed from the eyes of
men. Her repute is a curious comment on Tom Hood's

          "Where woman has never a soul to save."

[FN#364]  For Sharif and Sayyid, descendants of Mohammed, see
vol. iv. 170.

[FN#365]  These lines have occurred with variants in vol. iii.
257, and iv. 50.

[FN#366]  Arab. "Hazrat," esp. used in India and corresponding
with our mediaeval "praesentia vostra."

[FN#367]  This wholesale slaughter by the tale-teller of
worshipful and reverend men would bring down the gallery like a
Spanish tragedy in which all the actors are killed.

[FN#368]  They are called indifferently "Ruhb n"=monks or
"Bat rikah"=patriarchs. See vol. ii. 89.

[FN#369]  Arab. "Khil l." The toothpick, more esteemed by the
Arabs than by us, is, I have said, often used by the poets as an
emblem of attenuation without offending good taste. Nizami (Layla
u Majn£n) describes a lover as "thin as a toothpick." The
"elegant" Hariri (Ass. of Barkaid) describes a toothpick with
feminine attributes, "shapely of shape, attractive, provocative
of appetite, delicate as the leanest of lovers, polished as a
poinard and bending as a green bough."

[FN#370]  From Bresl. Edit. x. 194.

[FN#371]  Tr‚butien (vol. ii. 344 et seq.) makes the seven monks
sing as many anthems, viz. (1) Congregamini; (2) Vias tuas
demonstra mihi; (3) Dominus illuminatis; (4) Custodi linguam; (5)
Unam petii a Domino; (6) Nec adspiciat me visus, and (7) Turbatus
est a furore oculus meus. D nis the Abbot chaunts Anima mea
turbata est valdŠ.

[FN#372]  A neat and characteristic touch: the wilful beauty eats
and drinks before she thinks of her lover. Alas for Masrur
married.

[FN#373]  The unfortunate Jew, who seems to have been a model
husband (Orientally speaking), would find no pity with a
coffee-house audience because he had been guilty of marrying a
Moslemah. The union was null and void therefore the deliberate
murder was neither high nor petty treason. But, The Nights,
though their object is to adorn a tale, never deliberately
attempt to point a moral and this is one of their many charms.

[FN#374]  These lines have repeatedly occurred. I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#375]  i.e. by the usual expiation. See vol. iii. 136.

[FN#376]  Arab. "Shammiri"=up and ready!

[FN#377]  I borrow the title from the Bresl. Edit. x. 204. Mr.
Payne prefers "Ali Noureddin and the Frank King's Daughter." Lane
omits also this tale because it resembles Ali Shar and Zumurrud
(vol. iv. 187) and Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat (vol. iv. 29),
"neither of which is among the text of the collection." But he
has unconsciously omitted one of the highest interest. Dr. Bacher
(Germ. Orient. Soc.) finds the original in Charlemagne's daughter
Emma and his secretary Eginhardt as given in Grimm's Deutsche
Sagen. I shall note the points of resemblance as the tale
proceeds. The correspondence with the King of France may be a
garbled account of the letters which passed between Harun
al-Rashid and Nicephorus, "the Roman dog."

[FN#378]  Arab. "Allaho Akbar," the Moslem slogan or war-cry. See
vol. ii. 89.

[FN#379]  The gate-keeper of Paradise. See vol. iii. 15, 20.

[FN#380]  Negroes. Vol. iii. 75.

[FN#381]  Arab. "Nakat," with the double meaning of to spot and
to handsel especially dancing and singing women; and, as Mr.
Payne notes in this acceptation it is practically equivalent to
the English phrase "to mark (or cross) the palm with silver." I
have translated "Anwa" by Pleiads; but it means the setting of
one star and simultaneous rising of another foreshowing rain.
There are seven Anwa (plur. of nawa) in the Solar year viz.
Al-Badri (Sept.-Oct.); Al-Wasmiyy (late autumn and December);
Al-Waliyy (to April); Al-Ghamir (June); Al-Busriyy (July); Barih
al-Kayz (August) and Ahrak al-Hawa extending to September 8.
These are tokens of approaching rain, metaphorically used by the
poets to express "bounty". See Preston's Hariri (p. 43) and
Chenery upon the Ass. of the Banu Haram.

[FN#382]  i.e. They trip and stumble in their hurry to get there.

[FN#383]  Arab. "Kumm" = sleeve or petal. See vol. v. 32.

[FN#384]  Arab. "Kirab" = sword-case of wood, the sheath being of
leather.

[FN#385]  Arab. "Akr kayrawan," both rare words.

[FN#386]  A doubtful tradition in the Mishkat al-Masabih declares
that every pomegranate contains a grain from Paradise. See vol.
i. 134. The Koranic reference is to vi. 99.

[FN#387]  Arab. "Aswad," lit. black but used for any dark colour,
here green as opposed to the lighter yellow.

[FN#388]  The idea has occurred in vol. i. 158.

[FN#389]  So called from the places where they grow.

[FN#390]  See vol. vii. for the almond-apricot whose stone is
cracked to get at the kernel.

[FN#391]  For Roum see vol. iv. 100: in Morocco "Roumi" means
simply a European. The tetrastich alludes to the beauty of the
Greek slaves.

[FN#392]  Arab. "Ahlan" in adverb form lit. = "as one of the
household": so in the greeting "Ahlan wa Sahlan" (and at thine
ease), wa Marhaba (having a wide free place).

[FN#393]  For the Sufrah table-cloth see vol. i. 178.

[FN#394]  See vol. iii. 302, for the unclean allusion in fig and
sycamore.

[FN#395]  In the text "of Tor": see vol. ii. 242. The pear is
mentioned by Homer and grows wild in South Europe. Dr. Victor
Hehn (The Wanderings of Plants, etc.) comparing the Gr. {Greek
letters} with the Lat. Pyrus, suggests that the latter passed
over to the Kelts and Germans amongst whom the fruit was not
indigenous. Our fine pears are mostly from the East. e.g. the
"bergamot" is the Beg Armud, Prince of Pears, from Angora.

[FN#396]  i.e. "Royal," it may or may not come from Sultaniyah, a
town near Baghdad. See vol. i. 83; where it applies to oranges
and citrons.

[FN#397]  'Andam = Dragon's blood: see vol. iii. 263.

[FN#398]  Arab. "Jamar," the palm-pith and cabbage, both eaten by
Arabs with sugar.

[FN#399]  Arab. "Anwar" = lights, flowers (mostly yellow): hence
the Moroccan "N'war," with its usual abuse of Wakf or quiescence.

[FN#400]  Mr. Payne quotes Eugene Fromentin, "Un Ete dans le
Sahara," Paris, 1857, p. 194. Apricot drying can be seen upon all
the roofs at Damascus where, however, the season for each fruit
is unpleasantly short, ending almost as soon as it begins.

[FN#401]  Arab. "Jalajal" = small bells for falcons: in Port.
cascaveis, whence our word.

[FN#402]  Khulanjan. Sic all editions; but Khalanj, or Khaulanj
adj. Khalanji, a tree with a strong-smelling wood which held in
hand as a chaplet acts as perfume, as is probably intended. In
Span. Arabic it is the Erica-wood. The "Muhit" tells us that is a
tree parcel yellow and red growing in parts of India and China,
its leaf is that of the Tamarisk (Tarfa); its flower is coloured
red, yellow and white; it bears a grain like mustard-seed
(Khardal) and of its wood they make porringers. Hence the poet
sings, 

"Yut 'amu 'l-shahdu fi 'l-jifani, wa yuska * Labanu 'l-Bukhti fi
Kusa'i 'l-Khalanji: 
Honey's served to them in platters for food; * Camels' milk in
bowls of the Khalanj wood."

The pl. Khalanij is used by Himyan bin Kahafah in this "bayt",

"Hatta iza ma qazati 'l-Hawaija * Wa malaat Halaba-ha
'l-Khalanija:
Until she had done every work of hers * And with sweet milk had
filled the porringers."

[FN#403]  In text Al-Sha'ir Al-Walahan, vol. iii. 226.

[FN#404]  The orange I have said is the growth of India and the
golden apples of the Hesperides were not oranges but probably
golden nuggets. Captain Rolleston (Globe, Feb. 5, '84, on
"Morocco-Lixus") identifies the Garden with the mouth of the
Lixus River while M. Antichan would transfer it to the hideous
and unwholesome Bissagos Archipelago.

[FN#405]  Arab. "Ikyan," the living gold which is supposed to
grow in the ground.

[FN#406]  For the Kubbad or Captain Shaddock's fruit see vol. ii.
310, where it is misprinted Kubad.

[FN#407]  Full or Fill in Bresl. Edit. = Arabian jessamine or
cork-tree ({Greek letters}). The Bul. and Mac. Edits. read
"filfil" = pepper or palm-fibre.

[FN#408]  Arab. "Sumbul al-'Anbari"; the former word having been
introduced into England by patent medicines. "Sumbul" in Arab.
and Pers. means the hyacinth, the spikenard or the Sign Virgo.

[FN#409]  Arab. "Lisan al-Hamal" lit. = Lamb's tongue.

[FN#410]  See in Bresl. Edit. X, 221. Taif, a well-known town in
the mountain region East of Meccah, and not in the Holy Land, was
once famous for scented goat's leather. It is considered to be a
"fragment of Syria" (Pilgrimage ii. 207) and derives its name =
the circumambulator from its having circuited pilgrim-like round
Ka'abah (Ibid.).

[FN#411]  Arab. "Mikhaddah" = cheek-pillow: Ital. guanciale. In
Bresl. Edit. Mudawwarah (a round cushion) Sinjabiyah (of Ermine).
For "Mudawwarah" see vol. iv. 135.

[FN#412]  "Coffee" is here evidently an anachronism and was
probably inserted by the copyist. See vol. v. 169, for its first
metnion. But "Kahwah" may have preserved its original meaning =
strong old wine (vol. ii. 261); and the amount of wine-drinking
and drunkenness proves that the coffee movement had not set in.

[FN#413]  i.e. they are welcome. In Marocco "La baas" means, "I
am pretty well" (in health).

[FN#414]  The Rose (Ward) in Arab. is masculine, sounding to us
most uncouth. But there is a fem. form Wardah = a single rose.

[FN#415]  Arab. "Akmam," pl. of Kumm, a sleeve, a petal. See vol.
iv. 107 and supra p. 267. The Moslem woman will show any part of
her person rather than her face, instinctively knowing that the
latter may be recognised whereas the former cannot. The traveller
in the outer East will see ludicrous situations in which the
modest one runs away with hind parts bare and head and face
carefully covered.

[FN#416]  Arab. "Ikyan" which Mr. Payne translates "vegetable
gold" very picturesquely but not quite preserving the idea. See
supra p. 272.

[FN#417]  It is the custom for fast youths, in Egypt, Syria, and
elsewhere to stick small gold pieces, mere spangles of metal on
the brows, cheeks and lips of the singing and dancing girls and
the perspiration and mask of cosmetics make them adhere for a
time till fresh movement shakes them off.

[FN#418]  See the same idea in vol. i. 132, and 349.

[FN#419]  "They will ask thee concerning wine and casting of
lots; say: 'In both are great sin and great advantages to
mankind; but the sin of them both is greater than their
advantage.'" See Koran ii. 216. Mohammed seems to have made up
his mind about drinking by slow degrees; and the Koranic law is
by no means so strict as the Mullahs have made it. The
prohibitions, revealed at widely different periods and varying in
import and distinction, have been discussed by Al-Bayzawi in his
commentary on the above chapter. He says that the first
revelation was in chapt. xvi. 69 but, as the passage was
disregarded, Omar and others consulted the Apostle who replied to
them in chapt. ii. 216. Then, as this also was unnoticed, came
the final decision in chapt. v. 92, making wine and lots the work
of Satan. Yet excuses are never wanting to the Moslem, he can
drink Champagne and Cognac, both unknown in Mohammed's day and he
can use wine and spirits medicinally, like sundry of ourselves,
who turn up the nose of contempt at the idea of drinking for
pleasure.

[FN#420]  i.e. a fair-faced cup-bearer. The lines have occurred
before: so I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#421]  It is the custom of the Arabs to call their cattle to
water by whistling; not to whistle to them, as Europeans do,
whilst making water.

[FN#422]  i.e. bewitching. See vol. i. 85. These incompatible
metaphors are brought together by the Saj'a (prose rhyme)
in--"iyah."

[FN#423]  Mesopotamian Christians, who still turn towards
Jerusalem, face the West, instead of the East, as with Europeans:
here the monk is so dazed that he does not know what to do.

[FN#424]  Arab. "Bayt Sha'ar" = a house of hair (tent) or a
couplet of verse. Watad (