and the Somal behind Cape Guardafui tell the same tale of
their Cynhyænas.

[FN#128]  i.e. I will keep thee as though thou wert the apple of
my eye.

[FN#129]  A mere exaggeration of the "Gull-fairs" noted by
travellers in sundry islands as Ascension and the rock off
Brazilian Santos.

[FN#130]  Arab.  "Kámil wa Basít wa Wáfir" = the names of three
popular metres, for which see the Terminal Essay.

[FN#131]  Arab.  "Manáshif" = drying towels, Plur. of Minshafah,
and the popular term which Dr. Jonathan Swift corrupted to
"Munnassaf." Lane (Nights, Introduct. p. ix.).

[FN#132]  Arab.  "Shafaif" opposed to "Shafah" the mouth-lips.

[FN#133]  Fountains of Paradise. This description is a fair
instance of how the Saj'a (prose-rhyme) dislocates the order; an
Arab begins with hair, forehead, eyebrows and lashes and when he
reaches the nose, he slips down to the toes for the sake of the
assonance.  If the latter be neglected the whole list of charms
must be otherwise ordered; and the student will compare Mr.
Payne's version of this passage with mine.

[FN#134]  A fair specimen of the Arab logogriph derived from the
Abjad Alphabet which contains only the Hebrew and Syriac letters
not the six Arabic.  Thus 4 X 5=20 which represents the Kaf (K)
and 6 X 10=60, or Sin (S).  The whole word is thus "Kos", the
Greek       or       , and the lowest word, in Persian as in
Arabic, for the female pudenda, extensively used in vulgar abuse. 
In my youth we had at the University something of the kind,

     To five and five and fifty-five
     The first of letters add
     To make a thing to please a King
     And drive a wise man mad.

Answer VVLVA.  Very interesting to the anthropological student is
this excursus of Hasan, who after all manner of hardships and
horrors and risking his life to recover his wife and children,
breaks out into song on the subject of her privities.  And it can
hardly be tale-teller's gag as both verse and prose show
considerable art in composition. (See p. 348.)

Supplementary Note To Hasan of Bassorah.

Note(p.93)--There is something wondrous naïve in a lover who,
when asked by his mistress to sing a song in her honour, breaks
out into versical praises of her parts.  But even the classical
Arab authors did not disdain such themes.  See in Al-Harírí (Ass.
of Mayyáfarikín) where Abú Zayd laments the impotency of old age
in form of a Rasy or funeral oration (Preston p. 484, and Chenery
p. 221).  It completely deceived Sir William Jones, who inserted
it into the chapter "De Poesi Funebri," p. 527 (Poeseos Asiaticæ
Commentarii), gravely noting, "Hæc Elegia non admodum dissimilis
esse videtur pulcherrimi illius carminis de Sauli et Jonathani
obitu; at que adeò versus iste ‘ubi provocant adversarios nunquam
rediit a pugnæ contentione sine spiculo sanguine imbuto, ‘ex
Hebræoreddi videtur,

          A sanguine occisorum, a fortium virorum adipe,
          Arcus Jonathani non rediit irritus."

I need hardly say with Captain Lockett (226) that this "Sabb
warrior," this Arabian Achilles, is the celebrated Bonus Deus or
Hellespontiacus of the Ancients.  The oration runs thus:--

          O folk I have a wondrous tale, so rare
          Much shall it profit hearers wise and ware!
          I saw in salad-years a potent Brave
          And sharp of edge and point his warrior glaive;
          Who entered joust and list with hardiment
          Fearless of risk, of victory confident,
          His vigorous onset straitest places oped
          And easy passage through all narrows groped:
          He ne'er encountered foe in single fight
          But came from tilt with spear in blood stained bright;
          Nor stormed a fortress howso strong and stark--
          With fencèd gates defended deep and dark--
          When shown his flag without th' auspicious cry
          "Aidance from Allah and fair victory nigh!"‡
          Thus wise full many a night his part he played
          In strength and youthtide's stately garb arrayed,
          Dealing to fair young girl delicious joy
          And no less welcome to the blooming boy.
          But Time ne'er ceased to stint his wondrous strength
          (Steadfast and upright as the gallow's length)
          Until the Nights o'erthrew him by their might
          And friends contemned him for a feckless wight;
          Nor was a wizard but who wasted skill
          Over his case, nor leach could heal his ill.
          Then he abandoned arms abandoned him
          Who gave and took salutes so fierce and grim;
          And now lies prostrate drooping haughty crest;
          For who lives longest him most ills molest.
          Then see him, here he lies on bier for bet;--
          Who will a shroud bestow on stranger dead?

A fair measure of the difference between Eastern and Western
manners is afforded by such a theme being treated by their
gravest writers and the verses being read and heard by the
gravest and most worshipful men, whilst amongst us Preston and
Chenery do not dare even to translate them.  The latter, indeed,
had all that immodest modesty for which English professional
society is notable in this xixth century.  He spoiled by
needlessly excluding from a scientific publication (Mem. R.A.S.)
all of my Proverbia Communia Syriaca (see Unexplored Sryia, i.
364) and every item which had a shade of double entendre.  But
Nemesis frequently found him out: during his short and obscure
rule in Printing House Square, The Thunderer was distinguished by
two of the foulest indecencies that ever appeared in an English
paper.

‡  The well-known Koranic verse, whereby Allah is introduced into
an indecent tale and "Holy Writ" is punned upon.  I have noticed
(iii. 206) that victory Fat'h lit.=opening everything (as e.g. a
maidenhead).

[FN#135]  Egyptian and Syrian vulgar term for Mawálíyah or
Mawáliyah, a short poem on subjects either classical or vulgar. 
It generally consists of five lines all rhyming except the
penultimate.  The metre is a species of the Basít which, however,
admits of considerable poetical license; this being according to
Lane the usual "Weight,"

         /   /    /  .

The scheme is distinctly anapæstic and Mr. Lyall (Translations of
Ancient Arabic Poetry) compares with a cognate metre, the Tawíl,
certain lines in Abt Vogler, e.g.

     "Ye know why the forms are fair, ye hear how the tale is
told."

[FN#136]  i.e. repeat the chapter of the Koran termed The
Opening, and beginning with these words, "Have we not opened thy
breast for thee and eased thee of thy burden which galled thy
back? *** Verily with the difficulty cometh ease!"--Koran xciv.
vol. 1, 5.

[FN#137]  Lane renders Nur al-Hudà (Light of Salvation) by Light
of Day which would be Nur al-Hadà.

[FN#138]  In the Bresl. Edit.  "Yá Salám"=O safety!--a vulgar
ejaculation.

[FN#139]  A favourite idiom meaning from the mischief which may
(or will) come from the Queen.

[FN#140]  He is not strong-minded but his feminine persistency of
purpose, likest to that of a sitting hen, is confirmed by the
"Consolations of religion."  The character is delicately drawn.

[FN#141]  In token that she intended to act like a man.

[FN#142]  This is not rare even in real life: Moslem women often
hide and change their names for superstitious reasons, from the
husband and his family.

[FN#143]  Arab.  "Sabab" which also means cause.  Vol. ii. 14.
There is the same metaphorical use of "Habl"= cord and cause.

[FN#144]  Arab. "Himà," a word often occurring in Arab poetry,
domain, a pasture or watered land forcibly kept as far as a dog's
bark would sound by some masterful chief like "King Kulayb." (See
vol. ii. 77.) This tenure was forbidden by Mohammed except for
Allah and the Apostle (i.e. himself).  Lane translates it
"asylum."

[FN#145]  She was a maid and had long been of marriageable age.

[FN#146]  The young man had evidently "kissed the Blarney stone";
but the flattery is the more telling as he speaks from the heart.

[FN#147]  "Inshallah " here being= D. V.

[FN#148]  i.e. The "Place of Light" (Pharos), or of Splendour.
Here we find that Hasan's wife is the youngest sister, but with
an extraordinary resemblance to the eldest, a very masterful
young person.  The anagnorisis is admirably well managed.

[FN#149]  i.e. the sweetmeats of the feast provided for the
returning traveller.  The old woman (like others) cannot resist
the temptation of a young man's lips.  Happily for him she goes
so far and no farther.

[FN#150]  The first, fourth, fifth and last names have already
occurred: the others are in order, Star o' Morn, Sun of Undtirn
and Honour of Maidenhood.  They are not merely fanciful, but are
still used in Egypt and Syria.

[FN#151]  Arab.  "Fájirah" and elsewhere "Ahirah," =whore and
strumpet used often in loose talk as mere abuse without special
meaning.

[FN#152]  This to Westerns would seem a most improbable detail,
but Easterns have their own ideas concerning "Al-Muhabbat
al-ghariziyah" =natural affection, blood speaking to blood, etc.

[FN#153]  One of the Hells (see vol. iv. 143).  Here it may be
advisable to give the names of the Seven Heavens (which are
evidently based upon Ptolemaic astronomy) and which correspond
with the Seven Hells after the fashion of Arabian system-mania.
(1) Dar al-Jalál (House of Glory) made of pearls; (2) Dár
al-Salám (of Rest), rubies and jacinths; (3) Jannat al-Maawá
(Garden of Mansions, not "of mirrors," as Herklots has it, p.
98), made of yellow copper; (4) Jannat al-Khuld (of Eternity),
yellow coral; (5) Jannat al-Na'ím (of Delights), white diamond;
(6) Jannat al-Firdaus (of Paradise), red gold; and (7) Jannat
al-'Adn (of Eden, or Al-Karár= of everlasting abode, which some
make No. 8), of red pearls or pure musk.  The seven Hells are
given in vol. v. 241; they are intended for Moslems (Jahannam);
Christians (Lazà); Jews (Hutamah); Sabians (Sa'ir); Guebles
(Sakar); Pagans or idolaters (Jahím); and Hypocrites (Háwiyah).

[FN#154]  Arab.  "'Atb," more literally= "blame," "reproach."

[FN#155]  Bresl. Edit.  In the Mac.  "it returned to the place
whence I had brought it"--an inferior reading.

[FN#156]  The dreams play an important part in the Romances of
Chivalry, e.g. the dream of King Perion in Amadis de Gaul, chapt.
ii. (London; Longmans, 1803).

[FN#157]  Amongst Moslems bastardy is a sore offence and a
love-child is exceedingly rare.  The girl is not only carefully
guarded but she also guards herself knowing that otherwise she
will not find a husband.  Hence seduction is all but unknown. The
wife is equally well guarded and lacks opportunities hence
adultery is found difficult except in books.  Of the Ibn (or
Walad) Harám (bastard as opposed to the Ibn Halál) the proverb
says, "This child is not thine, so the madder he be the more is
thy glee!" Yet strange to say public prostitution has never been
wholly abolished in Al-Islam.  Al-Mas'údi tells us that in Arabia
were public prostitutes'(Bagháyá), even before the days of the
Apostle, who affected certain quarters as in our day the
Tartúshah of Alexandria and the Hosh Bardak of Cairo. Here says
Herr Carlo Landberg (p. 57, Syrian Proverbs) "Elles parlent une
langue toute à elle."  So pretentious and dogmatic a writer as
the author of Proverbes et Dictons de la Province de Syrie, ought
surely to have known that the Hosh Bardak is the head-quarters of
the Cairene Gypsies. This author, who seems to write in order to
learn, reminds me of an acute Oxonian undergraduate of my day
who, when advised to take a "coach," became a "coach" himself.

[FN#158]  These lines occur in vol. vii. p. 340. I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#159]  She shows all the semi-maniacal rancour of a good
woman, or rather a woman who has not broken the eleventh
commandment, "Thou shalt not be found out," against an erring
sister who has been discovered.  In the East also these unco'gúid
dames have had, and too often have, the power to carry into
effect the cruelty and diabolical malignity which in London and
Paris must vent itself in scan. mag. and anonymous letters.

[FN#160]  These faintings and trances are as common in the
Romances of Chivalry e.g. Amadis of Gaul, where they unlace the
garments to give more liberty, pour cold water on the face and
bathe the temples and pulses with diluted vinegar (for rose
water) exactly as they do in The Nights.

[FN#161]  So Hafiz, "Bád-i-Sabá chu bugzarí" etc.

[FN#162]  Arab. "Takiyah." See vol. i. 224 and for the Tarn-Kappe
vol. iv. p. 176. In the Sinthásana Dwatrinsati (vulgo.  Singhásan
Battísí), or Thirty-two Tales of a Throne, we find a bag always
full of gold, a bottomless purse; earth which rubbed on the
forehead overcomes all; a rod which during the first watch of the
night furnishes jewelled ornaments; in the second a beautiful
girl; in the third invisibility, and in the fourth a deadly foe
or death; a flower-garland which renders the possessor invisible
and an unfading lotus-flower which produces a diamond every day.

[FN#163]  Arab.  "Judad," plur. of Jadíd, lit.= new coin, ergo
applied to those old and obsolete; 10 Judad were= one nusf or
half dirham.

[FN#164]  Arab.  "Raff," a shelf proper, running round the room
about 7-7½ feet from the ground.  During my day it was the
fashion in Damascus to range in line along the Raff splendid
porcelain bowls brought by the Caravans in olden days from China,
whilst on the table were placed French and English specimens of
white and gold "china" worth perhaps a franc each.

[FN#165]  Lane supposes that the glass and china-ware had fallen
upon the divan running round the walls under the Raff and were
not broken.

[FN#166]  These lines have occurred in Night dclxxxix. vol. vii.
p. 119. I quote Lane.

[FN#167]  The lines have occurred before.  I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#168]  This formula, I repeat, especially distinguishes the
Tale of Hasan of Bassorah.

[FN#169]  These lines have occurred in vol. 1. 249. I quote Lane.

[FN#170]  She speaks to the "Gallery," who would enjoy a loud
laugh against Mistress Gadabout. The end of the sentence must
speak to the heart of many a widow.

[FN#171]  These lines occur in vol. i. 25: so I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#172]  Arab.  "Musáhikah;" the more usual term for a Tribade
is "Sahíkah" from "Sahk" in the sense of rubbing: both also are
applied to onanists and masturbators of the gender feminine.

[FN#173]  i.e. by way of halter.  This jar is like the cask in
Auerbach's Keller; and has already been used by witches; Night
dlxxxvii. vol. vi. 158.

[FN#174]  Here they are ten but afterwards they are reduced to
seven: I see no reason for changing the text with Lane and Payne.

[FN#175]  Wazir of Solomon.  See vol. i. 42; and vol. iii. 97.

[FN#176]  Arab.  "Ism al-A'azam," the Ineffable Name, a
superstition evidently derived from the Talmudic fancies of the
Jews concerning their tribal god, Yah or Yahvah.

[FN#177]  The tradition is that Mohámmed asked Akáf al-Wadá'ah
"Hast a wife?"; and when answered in the negative, "Then thou
appertainest to the brotherhood of Satans!  An thou wilt be one
of the Christian monks then company therewithal; but an thou be
of us, know that it is our custom to marry!"

[FN#178]  The old woman, in the East as in the West, being the
most vindictive of her kind.  I have noted (Pilgrimage iii. 70)
that a Badawi will sometimes though in shame take the blood-wit;
but that if it be offered to an old woman she will dash it to the
ground and clutch her knife and fiercely swear by Allah that she
will not eat her son's blood.

[FN#179]  Neither dome nor fount etc. are mentioned before, the
normal inadvertency.

[FN#180]  In Eastern travel the rest comes before the eating and
drinking.

[FN#181]  Arab.  "'Id" (pron.'Eed) which I have said (vol. i. 42,
317) is applied to the two great annual festivals, the "Fête of
Sacrifice," and the "Break-Fast."  The word denotes restoration
to favour and Moslems explain as the day on which Adam (and Eve)
who had been expelled from Paradise for disobedience was
re-established (Uída) by the relenting of Allah.  But the name
doubtless dates amongst Arabs from days long before they had
heard of the "Lord Nomenclator."

[FN#182]  Alluding to Hasan seizing her feather dress and so
taking her to wife.

[FN#183]  Arab.  "Kharajú"=they (masc.) went forth, a vulgarism
for "Kharajna" (fem.)

[FN#184]  Note the notable housewife who, at a moment when youth
would forget everything, looks to the main chance.

[FN#185]  Arab. "Al-Malakút" (not "Malkút" as in Freytag) a Sufi
term for the world of Spirits (De Lacy Christ, Ar. i. 451).
Amongst Eastern Christians it is vulgarly used in the fem. and
means the Kingdom of Heaven, also the preaching of the Gospel.

[FN#186]  This is so rare, even amongst the poorest classes in
the East, that it is mentioned with some emphasis.

[FN#187]  A beauty among the Egyptians, not the Arabs.

[FN#188]  True Fellah--"chaff."

[FN#189]  Alluding to the well-known superstition, which has
often appeared in The Nights, that the first object seen in the
morning, such as a crow, a cripple, or a cyclops determines the
fortunes of the day.  Notices in Eastern literature are as old as
the days of the Hitopadesa; and there is a something instinctive
in the idea to a race of early risers.  At an hour when the
senses are most impressionable the aspect of unpleasant
spectacles ahs double effect.

[FN#190]  Arab.  "Masúkah," the stick used for driving cattle,
bâton gourdin (Dozy).  Lane applies the word to a wooden plank
used for levelling the ground.

[FN#191]  i.e. the words I am about to speak to thee.

[FN#192]  Arab. "Sahifah," which may mean "page" (Lane) or "book"
(Payne).

[FN#193]  Pronounce, "Abussa'ádát" = Father of Prosperities: 
Lane imagines that it came from the Jew's daughter being called
"Sa'adat."  But the latter is the Jew's wife (Night dcccxxxiii)
and the word in the text is plural.  

[FN#194]  Arab.  "Furkh samak" lit. a fish-chick, an Egyptian
vulgarism.

[FN#195]  Arab.  "Al-Rasif"; usually a river-quay, levée, an
embankment.  Here it refers to the great dyke which distributed
the Tigris-water.

[FN#196]  Arab.  "Dajlah," see vol. i, p 180.  It is evidently
the origin of the biblical "Hiddekel" "Hid" = fierceness,
swiftness.

[FN#197]  Arab.  "Bayáz" a kind of Silurus (S. Bajad, Forsk.)
which Sonnini calls Bayatto, Saksatt and Hébedé; also Bogar
(Bakar, an ox).  The skin is lubricous, the flesh is soft and
insipid and the fish often grows to the size of a man.  Captain
Speke and I found huge specimens in the Tangany ika Lake.

[FN#198]  Arab.  "Mu'allim," vulg. "M'allim," prop.= teacher,
master esp. of a trade, a craft.  In Egypt and Syria it is a
civil address to a Jew or a Christian, as Hájj is to a Moslem.

[FN#199]  Arab.  "Gharámah," an exaction, usually on the part of
government like a corvée etc.  The Europeo-Egyptian term is
Avania (Ital.) or Avanie (French).

[FN#200]  Arab.  "Sayyib-hu" an Egyptian vulgarism found also in
Syria.  Hence Sáibah, a woman who lets herself go (a-whoring)
etc.  It is syn. with "Dashar," which Dozy believes to be a
softening of Jashar; and Jashsh became Dashsh.

[FN#201]  The Silurus is generally so called in English on
account of its feeler-acting mustachios.

[FN#202]  See Night dcccvii, vol. viii. p. 94.

[FN#203]  This extraordinary confusion of two distinct religious
mythologies cannot be the result of ignorance.  Educated Moslems
know at least as much as Christians do, on these subjects, but
the Rawi or story-teller speaks to the "Gallery."  In fact it
becomes a mere ‘chaff' and The Nights give some neat specimens of
our modern linguistic.

[FN#204]  See vol. ii. 197.  "Al-Siddíkah" (fem.) is a title of
Ayishah, who, however, does not appear to have deserved it.

[FN#205]  The Jew's wife.

[FN#206]  Here is a double entendre.  The fisherman meant a word
or two.  The Jew understood the Shibboleth of the Moslem Creed,
popularly known as the "Two Words,"--I testify that there is no
Ilah (god) but Allah (the God) and I testify that Mohammed is the
Messenger of Allah.  Pronouncing this formula would make the Jew
a Moslem.  Some writers are surprised to see a Jew ordering a
Moslem to be flogged; but the former was rich and the latter was
poor.  Even during the worst days of Jewish persecutions their
money-bags were heavy enough to lighten the greater part, if not
the whole of their disabilities.  And the Moslem saying is, "The
Jew is never your (Moslem or Christian) equal: he must be either
above you or below you."  This is high, because unintentional
praise of the (self-) Chosen People.

[FN#207]  He understands the "two words" (Kalmatáni) the Moslem's
double profession of belief; and Khalifah's reply embodies the
popular idea that the number of Moslems (who will be saved) is
preordained and that no art of man can add to it or take from it.

[FN#208]  Arab.  "Mamarr al-Tujjár" (passing-place of the
traders) which Lane renders "A chamber within the place through
which the traders passed."  At the end of the tale (Night
dccxlv.) we find him living in a Khan and the Bresl. Edit. (see
my terminal note) makes him dwell in a magazine (i.e. ground-
floor store-room) of a ruined Khan.

[FN#209]  The text is somewhat too concise and the meaning is
that the fumes of the Hashish he had eaten ("his mind under the
influence of hasheesh," says Lane) suggested to him, etc.

[FN#210]  Arab. "Mamrak" either a simple aperture in ceiling or
roof for light and air or a more complicated affair of lattice-
work and plaster; it is often octagonal and crowned with a little
dome.  Lane calls it "Memrak," after the debased Cairene
pronunciation, and shows its base in his sketch of a Ka'áh (M.E.,
Introduction).

[FN#211]  Arab.  "Kamar."  This is a practice especially amongst
pilgrims.  In Hindostan the girdle, usually a waist-shawl, is
called Kammar-band our old "Cummerbund."  Easterns are too
sensible not to protect the pit of the stomach, that great
ganglionic centre, against sun, rain and wind, and now our
soldiers in India wear flannel-belts on the march.

[FN#212]  Arab.  "Fa-immá 'alayhá wa-immá bihá," i.e. whether
(luck go) against it or (luck go) with it.

[FN#213]  "O vilest of sinners!" alludes to the thief.  "A
general plunge into worldly pursuits and pleasures announced the
end of the pilgrimage-ceremonies.  All the devotees were now
"whitewashed"--the book of their sins was a tabula rasa: too many
of them lost no time in making a new departure down South and in
opening a fresh account" (Pilgrimage iii. 365).  I have noticed
that my servant at Jeddah would carry a bottle of Raki, uncovered
by a napkin, through the main streets.

[FN#214]  The copper cucurbites in which Solomon imprisoned the
rebellious Jinns, often alluded to in The Nights.

[FN#215]  i.e. Son of the Chase: it is prob. a corruption of the
Persian Kurnas, a pimp, a cuckold, and introduced by way of
chaff, intelligible only to a select few "fast" men.

[FN#216]  For the name see vol. ii.61, in the Tale of Ghánim bin
'Ayyúb where the Caliph's concubine is also drugged by the Lady
Aubaydah.

[FN#217]  We should say, "What is this?" etc.  The lines have
occurred before so I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#218]  Zubaydah, I have said, was the daughter of Ja'afar, son
of the Caliph al-Mansur, second Abbaside.  The story-teller
persistently calls her daughter of Al-Kásim for some reason of
his own; and this he will repeat in Night dcccxxxix.

[FN#219]  Arab.  "Shakhs," a word which has travelled as far as
Hindostan.

[FN#220]  Arab.  "Shamlah" described in dictionaries, as a cloak
covering the whole body.  For Hizám (girdle) the Bresl. Edit.
reads "Hirám" vulg. "Ehrám," the waist-cloth, the Pilgrim's
attire.

[FN#221]  He is described by Al-Siyúti (p. 309) as "very fair,
tall handsome and of captivating appearance."

[FN#222]  Arab.  "Uzn al-Kuffah" lit. "Ear of the basket," which
vulgar Egyptians pronounce "Wizn," so "Wajh" (face) becomes
"Wishsh" and so forth.

[FN#223]  Arab.  "Bi-fardayn" = with two baskets, lit. "two
singles," but the context shows what is meant.  English Frail and
French Fraile are from Arab.  "Farsalah" a parcel (now esp. of
coffee-beans) evidently derived from the low Lat. "Parcella" (Du
Cange, Paris, firmin Didot 1845).  Compare "ream," vol. v. 109.

[FN#224]  Arab.  "Sátúr," a kind of chopper which here would be
used for the purpose of splitting and cleaning and scaling the
fish.

[FN#225]  And, consequently, that the prayer he is about to make
will find ready acceptance.

[FN#226]  Arab. "Ruh bilá Fuzúl" (lit. excess, exceeding) still a
popular phrase.

[FN#227]  i.e. better give the fish than have my head broken.

[FN#228]  Said ironicè, a favourite figure of speech with the
Fellah: the day began badly and threatened to end unluckily.

[FN#229]  The penalty of Theft.  See vol. i. 274. 

[FN#230]  This is the model of a courtly compliment; and it would
still be admired wherever Arabs are not "frankified." 

[FN#231]  Arab.  "Shibábah;" Lane makes it a kind of reed-
flageolet.

[FN#232]  These lines occur in vol. i. 76: I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#233]  The instinctive way of juggling with Heaven like our
sanding the sugar and going to church.

[FN#234]  Arab.  "Yá Shukayr," from Shakar, being red (clay,
etc.): Shukár is an anemone or a tulip and Shukayr is its dim.
Form. Lane's Shaykh made it a dim. of "Ashkar" = tawny, ruddy (of
complexion), so the former writes, "O Shukeyr."  Mr. Payne
prefers "O Rosy cheeks."

[FN#235]  For "Sandal," see vol. ii. 50.  Sandalí properly means
an Eunuch clean rasé, but here Sandal is a P.N. = Sandal-wood.

[FN#236]  Arab.  "Yá mumátil," one who retards payment.

[FN#237]  Arab. "Kirsh al-Nukhál" = guts of bran, a term too
little fitted for the handsome and distinguished Persian.  But
Khalifah is a Fallah-grazioso of normal assurance shrewd withal;
he blunders like an Irishman of the last generation and he uses
the first epithet that comes to his tongue.  See Night dcccxliii.
for the sudden change in Khalifah.

[FN#238]  So the Persian "May your shadow never be less" means, I
have said, the shadow which you throw over your servant. Shade,
cold water and fresh breezes are the joys of life in arid Arabia.

[FN#239]  When a Fellah demanded money due to him by the
Government of Egypt, he was a once imprisoned for arrears of
taxes and thus prevented from being troublesome.  I am told that
matters have improved under English rule, but I "doubt the fact."

[FN#240]  This freak is of course not historical.  The tale-
teller introduces it to enhance the grandeur and majesty of Harun
al-Rashid, and the vulgar would regard it as a right kingly
diversion.  Westerns only wonder that such things could be.

[FN#241]  Uncle of the Prophet: for his death see Pilgrimage ii.
248.

[FN#242]  First cousin of the Prophet, son of Abú Tálib, a
brother of Al-Abbas from whom the Abbasides claimed descent.

[FN#243]  i.e. I hope thou hast or Allah grant thou have good
tidings to tell me.

[FN#244]  Arab.  "Nákhúzah Zulayt."  The former, from the Persian
Nákhodá or ship-captain which is also used in a playful sense "a
godless wight," one owning no (ná) God (Khudá).  Zulayt = a low
fellow, blackguard.

[FN#245]  Yásamín and Narjis, names of slave-girls or eunuchs.

[FN#246]  Arab.  Tamar-hanná, the cheapest of dyes used ever by
the poorest classes.  Its smell, I have said, is that of newly
mown hay, and is prized like that of the tea-rose.

[FN#247]  The formula (meaning, "What has he to do here?") is by
no means complimentary.

[FN#248]  Arab.  "Jarrah" (pron. "Garrah") a "jar."  See Lane
(M.E. chapt. v.) who was deservedly reproached by Baron von
Hammer for his superficial notices.  The "Jarrah" is of pottery,
whereas the "Dist" is a large copper chauldron and the Khalkinah
one of lesser size.

[FN#249]  i.e. What a bother thou art, etc.

[FN#250]  This sudden transformation, which to us seems
exaggerated and unnatural, appears in many Eastern stories and in
the biographies of their distinguished men, especially students. 
A youth cannot master his lessons; he sees a spider climbing a
slippery wall and after repeated falls succeeding.  Allah opens
the eyes of his mind, his studies become easy to him, and he ends
with being an Allámah (doctissimus).

[FN#251]  Arab.  "Bismillah, Námí!" here it is not a blessing,
but a simple invitation, "Now please go to sleep."

[FN#252]  The modern inkcase of the Universal East is a lineal
descendant of the wooden palette with writing reeds.  See an
illustration of that of "Amásis, the good god and lord of the two
lands" (circ. B.C. 1350) in British Museum (p. 41, "The Dwellers
on the Nile," by E. A. Wallis Bridge, London, 56, Paternoster
Row, 1885).

[FN#253]  This is not ironical, as Lane and Payne suppose, but a
specimen of inverted speech--Thou art in luck this time!

[FN#254]  Arab.  "Marhúb" = terrible:  Lane reads "Mar'úb" =
terrified.  But the former may also mean, threatened with
something terrible.

[FN#255]  i.e. in Kut al-Kulúb.

[FN#256]  Lit. to the son of thy paternal uncle, i.e. Mohammed.

[FN#257]  In the text he tells of the whole story beginning with
the eunuch and the hundred dinars, the chest, etc.: but -- "of no
avail is a twice-told tale."

[FN#258]  Koran xxxix. 54.  I have quoted Mr. Rodwell who affects
the Arabic formula, omitting the normal copulatives.

[FN#259]  Easterns find it far easier to "get the chill of
poverty out of their bones" than Westerns.

[FN#260]  Arab.  "Dar al-Na'ím."  Name of one of the seven stages
of the Moslem heaven.  This style of inscription dates from the
days of the hieroglyphs.  A papyrus describing the happy town of
Raamses ends with these lines.--

     Daily is there a supply of food:
     Within it gladness doth ever brood
     *              *               *               *
     Prolonged, increased; abides there Joy, etc., etc.

[FN#261]  Arab.  "Ansár" = auxiliaries, the men of Al-Medinah
(Pilgrimage ii. 130, etc.).

[FN#262]  Arab.  "Asháb" = the companions of the Prophet who may
number 500 (Pilgrimage ii. 81, etc.).

[FN#263]  Arab. "Hásilah" prob. a corner of a "Godown" in some
Khan or Caravanserai.

[FN#264]  Arab. "Funduk" from the Gr.           , whence the
Italian Fondaco e.g. at Venice the Fondaco de' Turchi.

[FN#265]  Arab. "Astár" plur. of Satr: in the Mac. Edit. Sátúr,
both (says Dozy) meaning "Couperet" (a hatchet). Habicht
translates it "a measure for small fish," which seems to be a
shot and a bad shot as the text talks only of means of carrying
fish. Nor can we accept Dozy's emendation Astál (plur. of Satl)
pails, situlæ. In Petermann's Reisen (i. 89) Satr=assiette.

[FN#266]  Which made him expect a heavy haul.

[FN#267]  Arab. "Urkúb" = tendon Achilles in man hough or pastern
in beast, etc. It is held to be an incrementative form of 'Akab
(heel); as Kur'úb of Ka'b (heel) and Khurtúm of Khatm (snout).

[FN#268]  Arab. "Karmút" and "Zakzúk." The former (pronounced
Garmút) is one of the many Siluri (S. Carmoth Niloticus) very
common and resembling the Shál. It is smooth and scaleless with
fleshy lips and soft meat and as it haunts muddy bottoms it was
forbidden to the Ancient Egyptians. The Zakzúk is the young of
the Shál (Synodontis Schal: Seetzen); its plural form Zakázik
(pronounced Zigázig) gave a name to the flourishing town which
has succeeded to old Bubastis and of which I have treated in
"Midian" and "Midian Revisited."

[FN#269]  "Yá A'awar"=O one-eye! i.e.. the virile member. So the
vulgar insult "Ya ibn al-aur" (as the vulgar pronounce it) "O son
of a yard!" When AlMas'údi writes (Fr. Trans. vii. 106), "Udkhul
usbu'ak fí aynih," it must not be rendered "Il faut lui faire
violence": thrust thy finger into his eye ('Ayn) means "put thy
penis up his fundament!" ('Ayn being=Dubur). The French remarks,
"On en trouverait l'équivalent dans les bas-fonds de notre
langue," So in English "pig's eye," "blind eye," etc.

[FN#270]  Arab. "Nabbút"=a quarterstaff: see vol. i. 234.

[FN#271]  Arab. "Banní," vulg. Benni and in Lane (Lex. Bunni) the
Cyprinus Bynni (Forsk.), a fish somewhat larger than a barbel
with lustrous silvery scales and delicate flesh, which Sonnini
believes may be the "Lepidotes" (smooth-scaled) mentioned by
Athenæus. I may note that the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 332) also affects
the Egyptian vulgarism "Farkh-Banni" of the Mac. Edit. (Night
dcccxxxii.).

[FN#272]  The story-teller forgets that Khalif had neither basket
nor knife.

[FN#273]  Arab. "Rayhán" which may here mean any scented herb.

[FN#274]  In the text "Fard Kalmah," a vulgarism. The Mac. Edit.
(Night dcccxxxv.) more aptly says, "Two words" (Kalmatáni, vulg.
Kalmatayn) the Twofold Testimonies to the Unity of Allah and the
Mission of His Messenger.

[FN#275]  The lowest Cairene chaff which has no respect for
itself or others.

[FN#276]  Arab. "Karrat azlá hú": alluding to the cool skin of
healthy men when digesting a very hearty meal.

[FN#277]  This is the true Fellah idea. A peasant will go up to
his proprietor with the "rint" in gold pieces behind his teeth
and undergo an immense amount of flogging before he spits them
out. Then he will return to his wife and boast of the number of
sticks he has eaten instead of paying at once and his spouse will
say, "Verily thou art a man." Europeans know nothing of the
Fellah. Napoleon Buonaparte, for political reasons, affected
great pity for him and horror of his oppressors, the Beys and
Pashas; and this affectation gradually became public opinion. The
Fellah must either tyrannise or be tyrannised over; he is never
happier than under a strong-handed despotism and he has never
been more miserable than under British rule, or rather, misrule.
Our attempts to constitutionalise him have made us the
laughing-stock of Europe.

[FN#278]  The turban is a common substitute for a purse with the
lower classes of Egyptians; and an allusion to the still popular
practice of turban-snatching will be found in vol. i. p. 259.

[FN#279]  Arab. "Sálih," a devotee; here, a naked Dervish.

[FN#280]  Here Khalif is made a conspicuous figure in Baghdad
like Boccaccio's Calandrino and Co. He approaches in type the old
Irishman now extinct, destroyed by the reflux action Of
Anglo-America (U.S.) upon the miscalled "Emerald Isle." He
blunders into doing and saying funny things whose models are the
Hibernian "bulls" and acts purely upon the impulse of the moment,
never reflecting till (possibly) after all is over.

[FN#281]  Arab. "Kaylúlah," explained in vol. i. 51.

[FN#282]  i.e. thy bread lawfully gained. The "Bawwák"
(trumpeter) like the "Zammár" (piper of the Mac. Edit.) are
discreditable craftsmen, associating with Almahs and loose women
and often serving as their panders.

[FN#283]  i.e. he was indecently clad. Man's "shame" extends from
navel to knees. See vol vi. 30.

[FN#284]  Rashid would be=garden-cresses or stones: Rashíd the
heaven-directed.

[FN#285]  Arab. "Uff 'alayka"=fie upon thee! Uff=lit. Sordes
Aurium and Tuff (a similar term of disgust)=Sordes unguinum. To
the English reader the blows administered to Khalif appear rather
hard measure. But a Fellah's back is thoroughly broken to the
treatment and he would take ten times as much punishment for a
few piastres.

[FN#286]  Arab. "Zurayk" dim. of Azrak=blue-eyed. See vol. iii.
104.

[FN#287]  Of Baghdad.

[FN#288]  Arab. "Hásil," i.e. cell in a Khan for storing goods:
elsewhere it is called a Makhzan (magazine) with the same sense.

[FN#289]  The Bresl. text (iv. 347) abbreviates, or rather omits;
so that in translation details must be supplied to make sense.

[FN#290]  Arab. "Kamán," vulgar Egyptian, a contraction from
Kama' (as) + anna (since, because). So " Kamán shuwayh"=wait a
bit; " Kamán marrah"=once more and "Wa Karmána-ka"=that is why.

[FN#291]  i.e. Son of the Eagle: See vol. iv. 177. Here, however,
as the text shows it is hawk or falcon. The name is purely
fanciful and made mnemonically singular.

[FN#292]  The Egyptian Fellah knows nothing of boxing like the
Hausá man; but he is fond of wrestling after a rude and
uncultivated fashion, which would cause shouts of laughter in
Cumberland and Cornwall. And there are champions in this line,
See vol. iii. 93.

[FN#293]  The usual formula. See vol. ii. 5.

[FN#294]  As the Fellah still does after drinking a cuplet
("fingán" he calls it) of sugared coffee.

[FN#295]  He should have said "white," the mourning colour under
the Abbasides.

[FN#296]  Anglicè, "Fine feathers make fine birds"; and in
Eastern parlance, "Clothe the reed and it will become a bride."
(Labbis al-Búsah tabkí 'Arúsah, Spitta Bey, No. 275.) I must
allow myself a few words of regret for the loss of this Savant,
one of the most singleminded men known to me. He was vilely
treated by the Egyptian Government, under the rule of the
Jew-Moslem Riyáz; and, his health not allowing him to live in
Austria, he died shortly after return home.

[FN#297]  Arab. " Saub (Tobe) 'Atábi": see vol. iii. 149.

[FN#298]  In text "Kimkhá," which Dozy also gives Kumkh=chenille,
tissu de soie veloutee: Damasquète de soie or et argent de
Venise, du Levant , à fleurs, etc. It comes from Kamkháb or
Kimkháb, a cloth of gold, the well-known Indian "Kimcob."

[FN#299]  Here meaning=Enter in Allah's name!

[FN#300]  The Arabs have a saying, "Wine breeds gladness, music
merriment and their offspring is joy."

[FN#301]  Arab. "Jokh al-Saklát," rich kind of brocade on
broadcloth.

[FN#302]  Arab. "Hanabát," which Dozy derives from O. German
Hnapf, Hnap now Napf: thence too the Lat. Hanapus and Hanaperium:
Ital. Anappo, Nappo; Provenc. Enap and French and English
"Hanap"= rich bowl, basket, bag. But this is known even to the
dictionaries.

[FN#303]  Arab. " Kirám," nobles, and " Kurúm," vines, a word
which appears in Carmel=Karam-El (God's vineyard).

[FN#304]  Arab. "Suláf al-Khandarísí," a contradiction. Suláf=the
ptisane of wine. Khandarísí, from Greek        , lit. gruel,
applies to old wine.

[FN#305]  i.e. in bridal procession.

[FN#306]  Arab. "Al-'Arús, one of the innumerable tropical names
given to wine by the Arabs. Mr. Payne refers to Grangeret de la
Grange, Anthologie Arabe, p, 190.

[FN#307]  Here the text of the Mac. Edition is resumed.

[FN#308]  i.e. "Adornment of (good) Qualities." See the name
punned on in Night dcccli. Lane omits this tale because it
contains the illicit "Amours of a Christian and a Jewess who
dupes her husband in various abominable ways." The text has been
taken from the Mac. and the Bresl. Edits. x. 72 etc. In many
parts the former is a mere Epitome.

[FN#309]  The face of her who owns the garden.

[FN#310]  i.e. I am no public woman.

[FN#311]  i.e. with the sight of the garden and its mistress--
purposely left vague.

[FN#312]  Arab. "Dádat." Night dcclxxvi. vol. vii. p. 372.

[FN#313]  Meaning respectively "Awaking" (or blowing hard),
"Affairs" (or Misfortunes) and "Flowing" (blood or water). They
are evidently intended for the names of Jewish slave-girls.

[FN#314]  i.e. the brow-curls, or accroche-cœurs. See vol. i.
168.

[FN#315]  Arab. "Wisháh" usually applied to woman's broad belt,
stomacher (Al-Hariri Ass. af Rayy).

[FN#317]  The old Greek "Stephane."

[FN#317]  Alluding to the popular fancy of the rain-drop which
becomes a pearl.

[FN#318]  Arab. "Ghází"=one who fights for the faith.

[FN#319]  i.e. people of different conditions.

[FN#320]  The sudden change appears unnatural to Europeans; but
an Eastern girl talking to a strange man in a garden is already
half won. The beauty, however, intends to make trial of her
lover's generosity before yielding.

[FN#321]  These lines have occurred in the earlier part of the
Night: I quote Mr. Payne for variety.

[FN#322]  Arab. "Al-Sháh mát"=the King is dead, Pers. and Arab.
grotesquely mixed: Europeans explain "Checkmate" in sundry ways,
all more or less wrong.

[FN#323]  Cheating (Ghadr) is so common that Easterns who have no
tincture of Western civilisation look upon it not only as venial
but laudable when one can take advantage of a simpleton. No idea
of "honour" enters into it. Even in England the old lady
whist-player of the last generation required to be looked after
pretty closely--if Mr. Charles Dickens is to be trusted.

[FN#324]  Arab. "Al-Gháliyah," whence the older English Algallia.
See vol. i., 128. The Voyage of Linschoten, etc. Hakluyt Society
MDCCCLXXXV., with notes by my learned friend the late Arthur Coke
Burnell whose early death was so sore a loss to Oriental
students.

[FN#325]  A favourite idiom, "What news bringest thou?" ("O
Asám!" Arab. Prov. ii. 589) used by Háris bin Amrú, King of
Kindah, to the old woman Asám whom he had sent to inspect a girl
he purposed marrying.

[FN#326]  Amongst the Jews the Arab Salám becomes "Shalúm" and a
Jewess would certainly not address this ceremonial greeting to a
Christian. But Eastern storytellers care little for these
minutiæ; and the "Adornment of Qualities," was not by birth a
Jewess as the sequel will show.

[FN#327]  Arab. "Sálifah," the silken plaits used as adjuncts.
See vol. iii, 313.

[FN#328]  I have translated these lines in vol. i. 131, and
quoted Mr. Torrens in vol. iv. 235. Here I borrow from Mr. Payne.

[FN#329]  Mr. Payne notes:--Apparently some place celebrated for
its fine bread, as Gonesse in seventeenth-century France. It
occurs also in Bresl. Edit. (iv. 203) and Dozy does not
understand it. But Arj the root=good odour.

[FN#330]  Arab. "Tás," from Pers. Tásah. M. Charbonneau a
Professor of Arabic at Constantine and Member of the Asiatic Soc.
Paris, who published the Histoire de Chams-Eddine et Nour-Eddine
with Maghrabi punctuation (Paris, Hachette, 1852) remarks the
similarity of this word to Tazza and a number of other whimsical
coincidences as Zauj,       jugum; Inkár, negare; matrah,
matelas; Ishtirá, acheter, etc. To which I may add wasat, waist;
zabad, civet; Bás, buss (kiss); uzrub (pron. Zrub), drub; Kat',
cut; Tarík, track; etc., etc.

[FN#331]  We should say "To her (I drink)" etc.

[FN#332]  This is ad captandum. The lovers becoming Moslems would
secure the sympathy of the audience. In the sequel (Night
dccclviii) we learn that the wilful young woman was a born
Moslemah who had married a Jew but had never Judaized.

[FN#333]  The doggerel of this Kasidah is not so phenomenal as
some we have seen.

[FN#334]  Arab. "'Andam"=Brazil wood, vol. iii. 263.

[FN#335]  Arab. " Himà." See supra, p. 102.

[FN#336]  i.e. her favours were not lawful till the union was
sanctified by heartwhole (if not pure) love.

[FN#337]  Arab. "Mansúr wa munazzam=oratio soluta et ligata.

[FN#338]  i.e. the cupbearers.

[FN#339]  Which is not worse than usual.

[FN#340]  i.e. "Ornament of Qualities."

[FN#341]  The 'Akík, a mean and common stone, ranks high in
Moslem poetry on account of the saying of Mohammed recorded by
Ali and Ayishah "Seal with seals of Carnelian." ('Akik.)

[FN#342]  See note ii. at the end of this volume.

[FN#343]  Arab. "Mahall" as opposed to the lady's "Manzil," which
would be better "Makám." The Arabs had many names for their old
habitations, e.g.; Kubbah, of brick; Sutrah, of sun-dried mud;
Hazírah, of wood; Tiráf, a tent of leather; Khabáa, of wool;
Kash'a, of skins; Nakhád, of camel's or goat's hair; Khaymah, of
cotton cloth; Wabar, of soft hair as the camel's undercoat and
Fustát (the well-known P.N.) a tent of horsehair or any hair
(Sha'ar) but Wabar.

[FN#344]  This is the Maghribi form of the Arab. Súk=a
bazar-street, known from Tanjah (Tangiers) to Timbuctoo.

[FN#345]  Arab. "Walímah" usually=a wedding-feast. According to
the learned Nasíf alYazají the names of entertainments are as
follows: Al-Jafalà=a general invitation, opp. to Al-Nakarà,
especial; Khurs, a childbirth feast; 'Akíkah, when the boy-babe
is first shaved; A'zár=circumcision-feast; Hizák, when the boy
has finished his perlection of the Koran; Milák, on occasion of
marriage-offer; Wazímah, a mourning entertainment; Wakírah=a
"house-warming"; Nakí'ah, on returning from wayfare; 'Akírah, at
beginning of the month Rajab; Kirà=a guest-feast and Maadubah, a
feast for other cause; any feast.

[FN#346]  Arab. "Anistaná" the pop. phrase=thy company gladdens
us.

[FN#347]  Here "Muákhát" or making mutual brotherhood would
be=entering into a formal agreement for partnership. For the
forms of "making brotherhood," see vol. iii. 15.

[FN#348]  Arab. "Ishárah" in classical Arab. signs with the
finger (beckoning); Aumá with the hand; Ramz, with the lips;
Khalaj, with the eyelids (wink); and Ghamz with the eye. Aumáz is
a furtive glance, especially of women, and Ilház, a side-glance
from lahaza, limis oculis intuitus est. See Preston's Al-Hariri,
p. 181.

[FN#349]  Arab. "Haudaj" (Hind. Haudah, vulg.
Howda=elephant-saddle), the women's camel-litter, a cloth
stretched over a wooden frame. See the Prize-poem of Lebid, v.
12.

[FN#350]  i.e. the twelve days' visit.

[FN#351]  See note, vol. vii. 267. So Dryden (Virgil):--

          "And the hoarse raven on the blasted bough
          By croaking to the left presaged the coming blow."

And Gay (Fable xxxvii.),

          "That raven on the left-hand oak,
          Curse on his ill-betiding croak!"

In some Persian tales two crows seen together are a good omen.

[FN#352]  Vulgar Moslems hold that each man's fate is written in
the sutures of his skull but none can read the lines. See vol.
iii. 123.

[FN#353]  i.e. cease not to bemoan her lot whose moon-faced
beloved ones are gone.

[FN#354]  Arab. "Rukb" used of a return caravan; and also meaning
travellers on camels. The vulgar however apply "Rákib" (a
camel-rider) to a man on horseback who is properly Fáris plur.
"Khayyálah," while "Khayyál" is a good rider. Other names are
"Fayyál" (elephant-rider), Baghghál (mule-rider) and Hammár
(donkeyrider).

[FN#355]  A popular exaggeration. See vol. i. 117

[FN#356]  Lit. Empty of tent-ropes (Atnáb).

[FN#357]  Arab. "'Abír," a fragrant powder sprinkled on face,
body and clothes. In India it is composed of rice flower or
powdered bark of the mango, Deodar (uvaria longifolia),
Sandalwood, lign-aloes or curcuma (zerumbat or zedoaria) with
rose-flowers, camphor, civet and anise-seed. There are many of
these powders: see in Herklots Chiksá, Phul, Ood, Sundul, Uggur,
and Urgujja.

[FN#358]  i.e. fair faced boys and women. These lines are from
the Bresl. Edit. x. 160.

[FN#359]  i.e. the Chief Kazi. For the origin of the Office and
title see vol. ii. 90, and for the Kazi al-Arab who administers
justice among the Badawin see Pilgrimage iii. 45.

[FN#360]  Arab. "Raas al-Mál"=capital, as opposed to Ribá or
Ribh=interest. This legal expression has been adopted by all
Moslem races.

[FN#361]  Our Aden which is thus noticed by Abulfeda (A.D. 1331):
"Aden in the lowlands of Tehámah * * * also called Abyana from a
man (who found it?), built upon the seashore, a station (for land
travellers) and a sailing-place for merchant ships India-bound,
is dry and sunparcht (Kashifah, squalid, scorbutic) and sweet
water must be imported. * * * It lies 86 parasangs from San'á but
Ibn Haukal following the travellers makes it three stages. The
city, built on the skirt of a wall-like mountain, has a watergate
and a landgate known as Bab al-Sákayn. But 'Adan Lá'ah (the
modest, the timid, the less known as opposed to Abyan, the better
known?) is a city in the mountains of Sabir, Al-Yaman, whence
issued the supporters of the Fatimite Caliphs of Egypt." 'Adan
etymologically means in Arab. and Heb. pleasure (     ), Eden
(the garden), the Heaven in which spirits will see Allah and our
"Coal-hole of the East," which we can hardly believe ever to have
been an Eden. Mr. Badger who supplied me with this note described
the two Adens in a paper in Ocean Highways, which he cannot now
find. In the 'Ajáib al-Makhlúkát, Al-Kazwíni (ob. A.D. 1275)
derives the name from Ibn Sinán bin Ibrahím; and is inclined
there to place the Bír al-Mu'attal (abandoned well) and the Kasr
alMashíd (lofty palace) of Koran xxii. 44; and he adds "Kasr
al-Misyad" to those mentioned in the tale of Sayf al-Mulúk and
Badí'a al-Jamál.

[FN#362]  Meaning that she had been carried to the Westward of
Meccah.

[FN#363]  Arab. "Zahrawíyah" which contains a kind of double
entendre. Fátimah the Prophet's only daughter is entitled
Al-Zahrá the "bright-blooming"; and this is also an epithet of
Zohrah the planet Venus. For Fatimah see vol. vi. 145. Of her
Mohammed said, "Love your daughters, for I too am a father of
daughters" and, "Love them, they are the comforters, the
dearlings." The Lady appears in Moslem history a dreary young
woman (died æt. 28) who made this world, like Honorius, a hell in
order to win a next-world heaven. Her titles are Zahrá and Batúl
(Pilgrimage ii. 90) both signifying virgin. Burckhardt translates
Zahrá by "bright blooming" (the etymological sense): it denotes
literally a girl who has not menstruated, in which state of
purity the Prophet's daughter is said to have lived and died.
"Batúl" has the sense of a "clean maid" and is the title given by
Eastern Christians to the Virgin Mary. The perpetual virginity of
Fatimah even after motherhood (Hasan and Husayn) is a point of
orthodoxy in Al-Islam as Juno's with the Romans and Umá's with
the Hindú worshippers of Shiva. During her life Mohammed would
not allow Ali a second wife, and he held her one of the four
perfects, the other three being Asia wife of "Pharaoh," the
Virgin Mary and Khadijah his own wife. She caused much scandal
after his death by declaring that he had left her the Fadak
estate (Abulfeda I, 133, 273) a castle with a fine palmorchard
near Khaybar. Abu Bakr dismissed the claim quoting the Apostle's
Hadis, "We prophets are folk who will away nothing: what we leave
is alms-gift to the poor," and Shí'ahs greatly resent his
decision. (See Dabistan iii. 51–52 for a different rendering of
the words.) I have given the popular version of the Lady
Fatimah's death and burial (Pilgrimage ii. 315) and have remarked
that Moslem historians delight in the obscurity which hangs over
her last resting-place, as if it were an honour even for the
receptacle of her ashes to be concealed from the eyes of men. Her
repute is a curious comment on Tom Hood's

          "Where woman has never a soul to save."

[FN#364]  For Sharif and Sayyid, descendants of Mohammed, see
vol. iv. 170.

[FN#365]  These lines have occurred with variants in vol. iii.
257, and iv. 50.

[FN#366]  Arab. "Hazrat," esp. used in India and corresponding
with our mediæval "præsentia vostra."

[FN#367]  This wholesale slaughter by the tale-teller of
worshipful and reverend men would bring down the gallery like a
Spanish tragedy in which all the actors are killed.

[FN#368]  They are called indifferently "Ruhbán"=monks or
"Batárikah"=patriarchs. See vol. ii. 89.

[FN#369]  Arab. "Khilál." The toothpick, more esteemed by the
Arabs than by us, is, I have said, often used by the poets as an
emblem of attenuation without offending good taste. Nizami (Layla
u Majnún) describes a lover as "thin as a toothpick." The
"elegant" Hariri (Ass. of Barkaid) describes a toothpick with
feminine attributes, "shapely of shape, attractive, provocative
of appetite, delicate as the leanest of lovers, polished as a
poinard and bending as a green bough."

[FN#370]  From Bresl. Edit. x. 194.

[FN#371]  Trébutien (vol. ii. 344 et seq.) makes the seven monks
sing as many anthems, viz. (1) Congregamini; (2) Vias tuas
demonstra mihi; (3) Dominus illuminatis; (4) Custodi linguam; (5)
Unam petii a Domino; (6) Nec adspiciat me visus, and (7) Turbatus
est a furore oculus meus. Dánis the Abbot chaunts Anima mea
turbata est valdè.

[FN#372]  A neat and characteristic touch: the wilful beauty eats
and drinks before she thinks of her lover. Alas for Masrur
married.

[FN#373]  The unfortunate Jew, who seems to have been a model
husband (Orientally speaking), would find no pity with a
coffee-house audience because he had been guilty of marrying a
Moslemah. The union was null and void therefore the deliberate
murder was neither high nor petty treason. But, The Nights,
though their object is to adorn a tale, never deliberately
attempt to point a moral and this is one of their many charms.

[FN#374]  These lines have repeatedly occurred. I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#375]  i.e. by the usual expiation. See vol. iii. 136.

[FN#376]  Arab. "Shammirí"=up and ready!

[FN#377]  I borrow the title from the Bresl. Edit. x