. 204. Mr.
Payne prefers "Ali Noureddin and the Frank King's Daughter." Lane
omits also this tale because it resembles Ali Shar and Zumurrud
(vol. iv. 187) and Alá al-Din Abu al-Shámát (vol. iv. 29),
"neither of which is among the text of the collection." But he
has unconsciously omitted one of the highest interest. Dr. Bacher
(Germ. Orient. Soc.) finds the original in Charlemagne's daughter
Emma and his secretary Eginhardt as given in Grimm's Deutsche
Sagen. I shall note the points of resemblance as the tale
proceeds. The correspondence with the King of France may be a
garbled account of the letters which passed between Harun
al-Rashid and Nicephorus, "the Roman dog."

[FN#378]  Arab. "Allaho Akbar," the Moslem slogan or war-cry. See
vol. ii. 89.

[FN#379]  The gate-keeper of Paradise. See vol. iii. 15, 20.

[FN#380]  Negroes. Vol. iii. 75.

[FN#381]  Arab. "Nakat," with the double meaning of to spot and
to handsel especially dancing and singing women; and, as Mr.
Payne notes in this acceptation it is practically equivalent to
the English phrase "to mark (or cross) the palm with silver." I
have translated "Anwá" by Pleiads; but it means the setting of
one star and simultaneous rising of another foreshowing rain.
There are seven Anwá (plur. of nawa) in the Solar year viz.
Al-Badri (Sept.-Oct.); Al-Wasmiyy (late autumn and December);
Al-Waliyy (to April); Al-Ghamír (June); Al-Busriyy (July); Bárih
al-Kayz (August) and Ahrák al-Hawá extending to September 8.
These are tokens of approaching rain, metaphorically used by the
poets to express "bounty". See Preston's Hariri (p. 43) and
Chenery upon the Ass. of the Banu Haram.

[FN#382]  i.e. They trip and stumble in their hurry to get there.

[FN#383]  Arab. "Kumm" = sleeve or petal. See vol. v. 32.

[FN#384]  Arab. "Kiráb" = sword-case of wood, the sheath being of
leather.

[FN#385]  Arab. "Akr kayrawán," both rare words.

[FN#386]  A doubtful tradition in the Mishkát al-Masábih declares
that every pomegranate contains a grain from Paradise. See vol.
i. 134. The Koranic reference is to vi. 99.

[FN#387]  Arab. "Aswad," lit. black but used for any dark colour,
here green as opposed to the lighter yellow.

[FN#388]  The idea has occurred in vol. i. 158.

[FN#389]  So called from the places where they grow.

[FN#390]  See vol. vii. for the almond-apricot whose stone is
cracked to get at the kernel.

[FN#391]  For Roum see vol. iv. 100: in Morocco "Roumi" means
simply a European. The tetrastich alludes to the beauty of the
Greek slaves.

[FN#392]  Arab. "Ahlan" in adverb form lit. = "as one of the
household": so in the greeting "Ahlan wa Sahlan" (and at thine
ease), wa Marhabá (having a wide free place).

[FN#393]  For the Sufrah table-cloth see vol. i. 178.

[FN#394]  See vol. iii. 302, for the unclean allusion in fig and
sycamore.

[FN#395]  In the text "of Tor": see vol. ii. 242. The pear is
mentioned by Homer and grows wild in South Europe. Dr. Victor
Hehn (The Wanderings of Plants, etc.) comparing the Gr.      
with the Lat. Pyrus, suggests that the latter passed over to the
Kelts and Germans amongst whom the fruit was not indigenous. Our
fine pears are mostly from the East. e.g. the "bergamot" is the
Beg Armud, Prince of Pears, from Angora.

[FN#396]  i.e. "Royal," it may or may not come from Sultaníyah, a
town near Baghdad. See vol. i. 83; where it applies to oranges
and citrons.

[FN#397]  'Andam = Dragon's blood: see vol. iii. 263.

[FN#398]  Arab. "Jamár," the palm-pith and cabbage, both eaten by
Arabs with sugar.

[FN#399]  Arab. "Anwár" = lights, flowers (mostly yellow): hence
the Moroccan "N'wár," with its usual abuse of Wakf or quiescence.

[FN#400]  Mr. Payne quotes Eugene Fromèntin, "Un Eté dans le
Sahara," Paris, 1857, p. 194. Apricot drying can be seen upon all
the roofs at Damascus where, however, the season for each fruit
is unpleasantly short, ending almost as soon as it begins.

[FN#401]  Arab. "Jalájal" = small bells for falcons: in Port.
cascaveis, whence our word.

[FN#402]  Khulanján. Sic all editions; but Khalanj, or Khaulanj
adj. Khalanji, a tree with a strong-smelling wood which held in
hand as a chaplet acts as perfume, as is probably intended. In
Span. Arabic it is the Erica-wood. The "Muhit" tells us that is a
tree parcel yellow and red growing in parts of India and China,
its leaf is that of the Tamarisk (Tarfá); its flower is coloured
red, yellow and white; it bears a grain like mustard-seed
(Khardal) and of its wood they make porringers. Hence the poet
sings, 

"Yut 'amu 'l-shahdu fí 'l-jifáni, wa yuska * Labanu 'l-Bukhti fi
Kusá'i 'l-Khalanji: 
Honey's served to them in platters for food; * Camels' milk in
bowls of the Khalanj wood."

The pl. Khalánij is used by Himyán bin Kaháfah in this "bayt",

"Hattá izá má qazati 'l-Hawáijá * Wa malaat Halába-há
'l-Khalánijá:
Until she had done every work of hers * And with sweet milk had
filled the porringers."

[FN#403]  In text Al-Shá'ir Al-Walahán, vol. iii. 226.

[FN#404]  The orange I have said is the growth of India and the
golden apples of the Hesperides were not oranges but probably
golden nuggets. Captain Rolleston (Globe, Feb. 5, '84, on
"Morocco-Lixus") identifies the Garden with the mouth of the
Lixus River while M. Antichan would transfer it to the hideous
and unwholesome Bissagos Archipelago.

[FN#405]  Arab. "Ikyán," the living gold which is supposed to
grow in the ground.

[FN#406]  For the Kubbad or Captain Shaddock's fruit see vol. ii.
310, where it is misprinted Kubád.

[FN#407]  Full or Fill in Bresl. Edit. = Arabian jessamine or
cork-tree (      ). The Bul. and Mac. Edits. read "filfil" =
pepper or palm-fibre.

[FN#408]  Arab. "Sumbul al-'Anbari"; the former word having been
introduced into England by patent medicines. "Sumbul" in Arab.
and Pers. means the hyacinth, the spikenard or the Sign Virgo.

[FN#409]  Arab. "Lisán al-Hamal" lit. = Lamb's tongue.

[FN#410]  See in Bresl. Edit. X, 221. Taif, a well-known town in
the mountain region East of Meccah, and not in the Holy Land, was
once famous for scented goat's leather. It is considered to be a
"fragment of Syria" (Pilgrimage ii. 207) and derives its name =
the circumambulator from its having circuited pilgrim-like round
Ka'abah (Ibid.).

[FN#411]  Arab. "Mikhaddah" = cheek-pillow: Ital. guanciale. In
Bresl. Edit. Mudawwarah (a round cushion) Sinjabiyah (of Ermine).
For "Mudawwarah" see vol. iv. 135.

[FN#412]  "Coffee" is here evidently an anachronism and was
probably inserted by the copyist. See vol. v. 169, for its first
metnion. But "Kahwah" may have preserved its original meaning =
strong old wine (vol. ii. 261); and the amount of wine-drinking
and drunkenness proves that the coffee movement had not set in.

[FN#413]  i.e. they are welcome. In Marocco "Lá baas" means, "I
am pretty well" (in health).

[FN#414]  The Rose (Ward) in Arab. is masculine, sounding to us
most uncouth. But there is a fem. form Wardah = a single rose.

[FN#415]  Arab. "Akmám," pl. of Kumm, a sleeve, a petal. See vol.
iv. 107 and supra p. 267. The Moslem woman will show any part of
her person rather than her face, instinctively knowing that the
latter may be recognised whereas the former cannot. The traveller
in the outer East will see ludicrous situations in which the
modest one runs away with hind parts bare and head and face
carefully covered.

[FN#416]  Arab. "Ikyán" which Mr. Payne translates "vegetable
gold" very picturesquely but not quite preserving the idea. See
supra p. 272.

[FN#417]  It is the custom for fast youths, in Egypt, Syria, and
elsewhere to stick small gold pieces, mere spangles of metal on
the brows, cheeks and lips of the singing and dancing girls and
the perspiration and mask of cosmetics make them adhere for a
time till fresh movement shakes them off.

[FN#418]  See the same idea in vol. i. 132, and 349.

[FN#419]  "They will ask thee concerning wine and casting of
lots; say: 'In both are great sin and great advantages to
mankind; but the sin of them both is greater than their
advantage.'" See Koran ii. 216. Mohammed seems to have made up
his mind about drinking by slow degrees; and the Koranic law is
by no means so strict as the Mullahs have made it. The
prohibitions, revealed at widely different periods and varying in
import and distinction, have been discussed by Al-Bayzáwi in his
commentary on the above chapter. He says that the first
revelation was in chapt. xvi. 69 but, as the passage was
disregarded, Omar and others consulted the Apostle who replied to
them in chapt. ii. 216. Then, as this also was unnoticed, came
the final decision in chapt. v. 92, making wine and lots the work
of Satan. Yet excuses are never wanting to the Moslem, he can
drink Champagne and Cognac, both unknown in Mohammed's day and he
can use wine and spirits medicinally, like sundry of ourselves,
who turn up the nose of contempt at the idea of drinking for
pleasure.

[FN#420]  i.e. a fair-faced cup-bearer. The lines have occurred
before: so I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#421]  It is the custom of the Arabs to call their cattle to
water by whistling; not to whistle to them, as Europeans do,
whilst making water.

[FN#422]  i.e. bewitching. See vol. i. 85. These incompatible
metaphors are brought together by the Saj'a (prose rhyme)
in--"iyah."

[FN#423]  Mesopotamian Christians, who still turn towards
Jerusalem, face the West, instead of the East, as with Europeans:
here the monk is so dazed that he does not know what to do.

[FN#424]  Arab. "Bayt Sha'ar" = a house of hair (tent) or a
couplet of verse. Watad (a tentpeg) also is prosodical, a foot
when the two first letters are "moved" (vowelled) and the last is
jazmated (quiescent), e.g. Lakad. It is termed Majmú'a (united),
as opposed to "Mafrúk" (separated), e.g. Kabla, when the "moved"
consonants are disjoined by a quiescent.

[FN#425]  Lit. standing on their heads, which sounds ludicrous
enough in English, not in Arabic.

[FN#426]  These lines are in vol. iii. 251. I quote Mr. Payne who
notes "The bodies of Eastern women of the higher classes by dint
of continual maceration, Esther-fashion, in aromatic oils and
essences, would naturally become impregnated with the sweet
scents of the cosmetics used." 

[FN#427]  These lines occur in vol. i. 218: I quote Torrens for
variety.

[FN#428]  So we speak of a "female screw." The allusion is to the
dove-tailing of the pieces. This personification of the lute has
occurred before: but I solicit the reader's attention to it; it
has a fulness of Oriental flavour all its own.

[FN#429]  I again solicit the reader's attention to the
simplicity, the pathos and the beauty of this personification of
the lute.

[FN#430]  "They" for she.

[FN#431]  The Arabs very justly make the "'Andalib" =
nightingale, masculine.

[FN#432]  Anwár = lights or flowers: See Night dccclxv. supra p.
270.

[FN#433]  These couplets have occurred in vol. i. 168; so I quote
Mr. Payne.

[FN#434]  i.e. You may have his soul but leave me his body:
company with him in the next world and let me have him in this.

[FN#435]  Alluding to the Koranic (cxiii. 1.), "I take refuge
with the Lord of the Daybreak from the mischief of that which He
hath created, etc." This is shown by the first line wherein
occurs the Koranic word "Ghásik" (cxiii. 3) which may mean the
first darkness when it overspreadeth or the moon when it is
eclipsed.

[FN#436]  "Malak" = level ground; also tract on the Nile sea.
Lane M.E. ii. 417, and Bruckhardt Nubia 482.

[FN#437]  This sentiment has often been repeated.

[FN#438]  The owl comes in because "Búm" (pron. boom) rhymes with
Kayyúm = the Eternal.

[FN#439]  For an incident like this see my Pilgrimmage (vol. i.
176). How true to nature the whole scene is; the fond mother
excusing her boy and the practical father putting the excuse
aside. European paternity, however, would probably exclaim, "The
beast's in liquor!"

[FN#440]  In ancient times this seems to have been the universal
and perhaps instinctive treatment of the hand that struck a
father. By Nur al-Din's flight the divorce-oath became
technically null and void for Taj al-Din had sworn to mutilate
his son next morning.

[FN#441]  So Roderic Random and his companions "sewed their money
between the lining and the waistband of their breeches, except
some loose silver for immediate expense on the road." For a
description of these purses see Pilgrimage i. 37.

[FN#442]  Arab. Rashid (our Rosetta), a corruption of the Coptic
Trashit; ever famous for the Stone.

[FN#443]  For a parallel passage in praise of Alexandria see vol.
i. 290, etc. The editor or scribe was evidently an Egyptian.

[FN#444]  Arab. "Saghr" (Thagr), the opening of the lips showing
the teeth. See vol. i. p. 156.

[FN#445]  Iskandariyah, the city of Iskandar or Alexander the
Great, whose "Soma" was attractive to the Greeks as the corpse of
the Prophet Daniel afterwards was to the Moslems. The choice of
site, then occupied only by the pauper village of Rhacotis, is
one proof of many that the Macedonian conqueror had the
inspiration of genius.

[FN#446]  i.e. paid them down. See vol. i. 281; vol. ii. 145.

[FN#447]  Arab. "Baltiyah," Sonnini's "Bolti" and Nébuleux
(because it is dozid-coloured when fried), the Labrus Niloticus
from its labra or large fleshy lips. It lives on the "leaves of
Paradise" hence the flesh is delicate and savoury and it is
caught with the épervier or sweep-net in the Nile, canals and
pools.

[FN#448]  Arab. "Liyyah," not a delicate comparison, but
exceedingly apt besides rhyming to "Baltiyah." The cauda of the
"five-quarter sheep, whose tails are so broad and thick that
there is as much flesh upon them as upon a quarter of their
body," must not be confounded with the lank appendage of our
English muttons. See i. 25, Dr. Burnell's Linschoten (Hakluyt
Soc. 1885). 

[FN#449]  A variant occurs in vol. ix. 191.

[FN#450]  Arab. "Tars Daylami," a small shield of bright metal.

[FN#451]  Arab. "Kaukab al-durri," see Pilgrimage ii. 82.

[FN#452]  Arab. "Kusúf" applied to the moon; Khusúf being the
solar eclipse.

[FN#453]  May Abú Lahab's hands perish. . . and his wife be a
bearer of faggots!" Korau cxi. 184. The allusion is neat.

[FN#454]  Alluding to the Angels who shoot down the Jinn. See
vol. i. 224. The index misprints "Shibáh."

[FN#455]  For a similar scene see Ali Shar and Zumurrud, vol. iv.
187.

[FN#456]  i.e. of the girl whom as the sequel shows, her owner
had promised not to sell without her consent. This was and is a
common practice. See vol. iv. 192.

[FN#457]  These lines have occurred in vol. iii. p. 303. I quote
Mr. Payne.

[FN#458]  Alluding to the erectio et distensio penis which comes
on before dawn in tropical lands and which does not denote any
desire for women. Some Anglo-Indians term the symptom signum
salutis, others a urine-proud pizzle.

[FN#459]  Arab. "Mohtasib," in the Maghrib "Mohtab," the officer
charged with inspecting weights and measures and with punishing
fraud in various ways such as nailing the cheat's ears to his
shop's shutter, etc.

[FN#460]  Every where in the Moslem East the slave holds himself
superior to the menial freeman, a fact which I would impress upon
the several Anti-slavery Societies, honest men whose zeal mostly
exceeds their knowledge, and whose energy their discretion.

[FN#461]  These lines, extended to three couplets, occur in vol.
iv. 193. I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#462]  "At this examination (on Judgment Day) Mohammedans also
believe that each person will have the book, wherein all the
actions of his life are written, delivered to him; which books
the righteous will receive in their right hand, and read with
great pleasure and satisfaction; but the ungodly will be obliged
to take them, against their wills, in their left (Koran xvii.
xviii. lxix, and lxxxiv.), which will be bound behind their
backs, their right hand being tied to their necks." Sale,
Preliminary Discourse; Sect. iv.

[FN#463]  "Whiteness" (bayáz) also meaning lustre, honour.

[FN#464]  This again occurs in vol. iv. 194. So I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#465]  Her impudence is intended to be that of a captive
Princess.

[FN#466]  i.e. bent groundwards.

[FN#467]  See vol. iv. 192. In Marocco Za'ar is applied to a man
with fair skin, red hair and blue eyes (Gothic blood?) and the
term is not complimentary as "Sultan Yazid Za'ar."

[FN#468]  The lines have occurred before (vol. iv. 194). I quote
Mr. Lane ii. 440. Both he and Mr. Payne have missed the point in
"ba'zu layáli" a certain night when his mistress had left him so
lonely.

[FN#469]  Arab. "Raat-hu." This apparently harmless word suggests
one simlar in sound and meaning which gave some trouble in its
day. Says Mohammed in the Koran (ii. 98) "O ye who believe! say
not (to the Apostle) Rá'iná (look at us) but Unzurná (regard
us)." "Rá'iná" as pronounced in Hebrew means "our bad one."

[FN#470]  By reason of its leanness.

[FN#471]  In the Mac. Edit. "Fifty." For a scene which
illustrates this mercantile transaction see my Pilgrimage i. 88,
and its deduction. "How often is it our fate, in the West as in
the East, to see in bright eyes and to hear from rosy lips an
implied, if not an expressed 'Why don't you buy me?' or, worse
still, 'Why can't you buy me?'"

[FN#472]  See vol. ii. 165 dragging or trailing the skirts =
walking without the usual strut or swagger: here it means
assuming the humble manners of a slave in presence of the master.

[FN#473]  This is the Moslem form of "boycotting": so amongst
early Christians they refused to give one another God-speed.
Amongst Hindús it takes the form of refusing "Hukkah (pipe) and
water" which practically makes a man an outcast. In the text the
old man expresses the popular contempt for those who borrow and
who do not repay. He had evidently not read the essay of Elia on
the professional borrower.

[FN#474]  See note p. 273.

[FN#475]  i.e. the best kind of camels.

[FN#476]  This first verse has occurred three times.

[FN#477]  Arab. "Surayyá" in Dictionaries a dim. of Sarwá =
moderately rich. It may either denote abundance of rain or a
number of stars forming a constellation. Hence in Job (xxxviii.
31) it is called a heap (kímah).

[FN#478]  Pleiads in Gr. the Stars whereby men sail.

[FN#479]  This is the Eastern idea of the consequence of
satisfactory coition which is supposed to be the very seal of
love. Westerns have run to the other extreme.

[FN#480]  "Al-Ríf" simply means lowland: hence there is a Ríf in
the Nile-delta. The word in Europe is applied chiefly to the
Maroccan coast opposite Gibraltar (not, as is usually supposed
the North-Western seaboard) where the Berber-Shilhá race, so
famous as the "Rif pirates" still closes the country to
travellers.

[FN#481]  i.e. Upper Egypt.

[FN#482]  These local excellencies of coition are described
jocosely rather than anthropologically.

[FN#483]  See vol. i. 223: I take from Torrens, p. 223.

[FN#484]  For the complete ablution obligatory after copulation
before prayers can be said. See vol. vi. 199.

[FN#485]  Arab. "Zunnár," the Greek         , for which, see vol.
ii. 215.

[FN#486]  Miriam (Arabic Maryam), is a Christian name, in Moslem
lands. Abú Maryam "Mary's father" (says Motarrazi on Al-Hariri,
Ass. of Alexandria) is a term of contempt, for men are called
after sons (e.g. Abu Zayd), not after daughters. In more modern
authors Abu Maryam is the name of ushers and lesser officials in
the Kazi's court. 

[FN#487]  This formality, so contrary to our Western familiarity
after possession, is an especial sign of good breeding amongst
Arabs and indeed all Eastern nations. It reminds us of the "grand
manner" in Europe two hundred years ago, not a trace of which now
remains.

[FN#488]  These lines are in Night i. ordered somewhat
differently: so I quote Torrens (p. 14). 

[FN#489]  i.e. to the return Salám--"And with thee be peace and
the mercy of Allah and His blessings!" See vol. ii. 146. The
enslaved Princess had recognised her father's Wazir and knew that
he could have but one object, which being a man of wit and her
lord a "raw laddie," he was sure to win.

[FN#490]  It is quite in Moslem manners for the bystanders to
force the sale seeing a silly lad reject a most advantageous
offer for sentimental reasons. And the owner of the article would
be bound by their consent.

[FN#491]  Arab. "Wa'llahi." "Bi" is the original particle of
swearing, a Harf al-jarr (governing the genitive as Bi'lláhi) and
suggesting the idea of adhesion: "Wa" (noting union) is its
substitute in oath-formulæ and "Ta" takes the place of Wa as
Ta'lláhi. The three-fold forms are combined in a great "swear."

[FN#492]  i.e. of divorcing their own wives.

[FN#493]  These lines have occurred before: I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#494]  These lines are in Night xxvi., vol. i. 275: I quote
Torrens (p. 277), with a correction for "when ere."

[FN#495]  This should be "draws his senses from him as one pulls
hair out of paste."

[FN#496]  Rághib and Záhid: see vol. v. 141.

[FN#497]  Carolus Magnus then held court in Paris; but the text
evidently alludes to one of the port-cities of Provence as
Marseille which we English will miscall Marseilles.

[FN#498]  Here the writer, not the young wife, speaks; but as a
tale-teller he says "hearer"not "reader."

[FN#499]  Kayrawán, the Arab. form of the Greek Cyrene which has
lately been opened to travellers and has now lost the mystery
which enschrouded it. In Hafiz and the Persian poets it is the
embodiment of remoteness and secrecy; as we till the last quarter
century spoke of the "deserts of Central Africa."

[FN#500]  Arab. "'Innín": alluding to all forms of impotence,
from dislike, natural deficiency or fascination, the favourite
excuse. Easterns seldom attribute it to the true cause, weak
action of the heart; but the Romans knew the truth when they
described one of its symptoms as cold feet. "Clino-pedalis, ad
venerem invalidus, ab ea antiqua opinione, frigiditatem pedum
concubituris admondum officere." Hence St. Francis and the
bare-footed Friars. See Glossarium Eroticum Linguae Latinæ,
Parisiis, Dondey-Dupré, MDCCCXXVI.

[FN#501]  I have noted the use of "island" for "land" in general.
So in the European languages of the sixteenth century, insula was
used for peninsula, e.g. Insula de Cori = the Corean peninsula.

[FN#502]  As has been noticed (vol. i. 333), the monocular is
famed for mischief and men expect the mischief to come from his
blinded eye.

[FN#503]  Here again we have a specimen of "inverted speech"
(vol. ii. 265); abusive epithets intended for a high compliment,
signifying that the man was a tyrant over rebels and a froward
devil to the foe.

[FN#504]  Arab. "Bab al-Bahr," see vol. iii. 281.

[FN#505]  Arab. "Batárikah" see vol. ii. 89. The Templars,
Knights of Malta and other orders half ecclesiastic, half
military suggested the application of the term.

[FN#506]  These lines have occurred in vol. i. 280--I quote
Torrens (p. 283).

[FN#507]  Maryam al-Husn containing a double entendre, "O place
of the white doe (Rím) of beauty!" The girl's name was Maryam the
Arab. form of Mary, also applied to the B.V. by Eastern
Christians. Hence a common name of Syrian women is "Husn Maryam"
= (one endowed with the spiritual beauties of Mary: vol. iv. 87).
I do not think that the name was "manufactured by the Arab
story-tellers after the pattern of their own names (e.g. Nur
al-Din or Noureddin, light of the faith, Tajeddin, crown of
faith, etc.) for the use of their imaginary Christian female
characters."

[FN#508]  I may here remind readers that the Bán, which some
Orientalists will write "Ben," is a straight and graceful species
of Moringa with plentiful and intensely green foliage.

[FN#509]  Arab. "Amúd al-Sawári" = the Pillar of Masts, which is
still the local name of Diocletian's column absurdly named by
Europeans "Pompey's Pillar."

[FN#510]  Arab. "Batiyah," also used as a wine-jar (amphora), a
flagon.

[FN#511]  Arab. "Al-Kursán," evidently from the Ital. "Corsaro,"
a runner. So the Port. "Cabo Corso," which we have corrupted to
"Cape Coast Castle" (Gulf of Guinea), means the Cape of Tacking.

[FN#512]  Arab. "Ghuráb," which Europeans turn to "Grab."

[FN#513]  Arab. "Sayyib" (Thayyib) a rare word: it mostly applies
to a woman who leaves her husband after lying once with him.

[FN#514]  Arab. "Batárikah:" here meaning knights, leaders of
armed men as in Night dccclxii., supra p. 256, it means "monks."

[FN#515]  i.e. for the service of a temporal monarch.

[FN#516]  Arab. "Sayr" = a broad strip of leather still used by
way of girdle amongst certain Christian religions in the East.

[FN#517]  Arab. "Haláwat al-Salámah," the sweetmeats offered to
friends after returning from a journey or escaping sore peril.
See vol. iv. 60.

[FN#518]  So Eginhardt was an Erzcapellan and belonged to the
ghostly profession.

[FN#519]  These lines are in vols. iii. 258 and iv. 204. I quote
Mr. Payne.

[FN#520]  Arab. "Firásah," lit. = skill in judging of horse flesh
(Faras) and thence applied, like "Kiyáfah," to physiognomy. One
Kári was the first to divine man's future by worldly signs
(Al-Maydáni, Arab. prov. ii. 132) and the knowledge was
hereditary in the tribe Mashíj.

[FN#521]  Reported to be a "Hadis" or saying of Mohammed, to whom
are attributed many such shrewd aphorisms, e.g. "Allah defend us
from the ire of the mild (tempered)."

[FN#522]  These lines are in vol. i. 126. I quote Torrens (p.
120).

[FN#523]  These lines have occurred before. I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#524]  Arab. "Khák-bák," an onomatopia like our flip-flap and
a host of similar words. This profaning a Christian Church which
contained the relics of the Virgin would hugely delight the
coffee-house habitués, and the Egyptians would be equally
flattered to hear that the son of a Cairene merchant had made the
conquest of a Frankish Princess Royal. That he was an arrant
poltroon mattered very little, as his cowardice only set of his
charms.

[FN#525]  i.e. after the rising up of the dead.

[FN#526]  Arab. "Nafísah," the precious one i.e. the Virgin.

[FN#527]  Arab. "Nákús," a wooden gong used by Eastern Christians
which were wisely forbidden by the early Moslems.

[FN#528]  i.e. a graceful, slender youth.

[FN#529]  There is a complicatd pun in this line: made by
splitting the word after the fashion of punsters. "Zarbu
'l-Nawákísí" = the striking of the gongs, and "Zarbu 'l Nawá,
Kísí = striking the departure signal: decide thou (fem. addressed
to the Nafs, soul or self)" I have attempted a feeble imitation.

[FN#530]  The modern Italian term of the venereal finish.

[FN#531]  Arab. "Najm al-Munkazzi," making the envious spy one of
the prying Jinns at whom is launched the Shiháb or shooting-star
by the angels who prevent them listening at the gates of Heaven.
See vol. i. 224.

[FN#532]  Arab. "Sandúk al-Nuzur," lit. "the box of vowed
oblations." This act of sacrilege would find high favour with the
auditory.

[FN#533]  The night consisting like the day of three watches. See
vol. i.

[FN#534]  Arab. "Al-Khaukhah," a word now little used.

[FN#535]  Arab. "Námúsiyah," lit. mosquito curtains.

[FN#536]  Arab. "Jáwawshiyah," see vol. ii. 49.

[FN#537]  Arab. "Kayyimah," the fem. of "Kayyim," misprinted
"Kayim" in vol. ii. 93.

[FN#538]  i.e. hadst thou not disclosed thyself. He has one great
merit in a coward of not being ashamed for his cowardice; and
this is a characteristic of the modern Egyptian, whose proverb
is, "He ran away, Allah shame him! is better than, He was slain,
Allah bless him!"

[FN#539]  Arab. "Ahjar al-Kassárín" nor forgotten. In those days
ships anchored in the Eastern port of Alexandria which is now
wholly abandoned on account of the rocky bottom and the dangerous
"Levanter," which as the Gibraltar proverb says

          "Makes the stones canter."

[FN#540]  Arab. "Hakk" = rights, a word much and variously used.
To express the possessive "mine" a Badawi says "Hakki" (pron.
Haggi) and "Lílí;" a Syrian "Shítí" for Shayyati, my little thing
or "taba 'i" my dependent; an Egyptian "Bitá' i" my portion and a
Maghribi "M'tá 'i" and "diyyáli" (di allazí lí = this that is to
me). Thus "mine" becomes a shibboleth.

[FN#541]  i.e. The "Good for nothing," the "Bad'un;" not some
forgotten ruffian of the day, but the hero of a tale antedating
The Nights in their present form. See Terminal Essay, x. ii.

[FN#542]  i.e. Hoping to catch Nur al-Din.

[FN#543]  Arab. "Sawwáhún" = the Wanderers, Pilgrims, wandering
Arabs, whose religion, Al-Islam, so styled by its Christain
opponents. And yet the new creed was at once accepted by whole
regions of Christians, and Mauritania, which had rejected Roman
paganism and Gothic Christianity. This was e.g. Syria and the
so-called "Holy Land," not because, as is fondly asserted by
Christians, al-Islam was forced upon them by the sword, but on
account of its fulfilling a need, its supplying a higher belief,
unity as opposed to plurality, and its preaching a more manly
attitude of mind and a more sensible rule of conduct. Arabic
still preserves a host of words special to the Christian creed;
and many of them have been adopted by Moslems but with changes of
signification.

[FN#544]  i.e. of things commanded and things prohibited. The
writer is thinking of the Koran in which there are not a few
abrogated injunctions.

[FN#545]  See below for the allusion.

[FN#546]  Arab. "Kafrá" = desert place. It occurs in this
couplet,

          "Wa Kabrun Harbin fíi-makáanin Kafrin;
           Wa laysa Kurba Kabri Harbin Kabrun."
     "Harb's corse is quartered in coarse wold accurst;
     Nor close to corse of Harb is other corse;--"

words made purposely harsh because uttered by a Jinni who killed
a traveller named "Harb."
So Homer:--

     "       '                ,                    '      ."

and Pope:--

"O'er hills, o'er dales, o'er crags, o'er rocks they go, etc."

See Preface (p. v.) to Captain A. Lockett's learned and whimsical
volume, "The Muit Amil" etc. Calcutta, 1814.

[FN#547]  These lines have occurred vol. iv. 267. I quote Mr.
Lane.

[FN#548]  The topethesia is here designedly made absurd.
Alexandria was one of the first cities taken by the Moslems (A.H.
21 = 642) and the Christian pirates preferred attacking weaker
places, Rosetta and Damietta.

[FN#549]  Arab. "Bilád al-Rúm," here and elsewhere applied to
France.

[FN#550]  Here the last line of p. 324, vol. iv. in the Mac.
Edit. is misplaced and belongs to the next page.

[FN#551]  Arab. "Akhawán shikíkán" = brothers german (of men and
beasts) born of one father and mother, sire and dam.

[FN#552]  "The Forerunner" and "The Overtaker," terms borrowed
from the Arab Epsom.

[FN#553]  Known to us as "the web and pin," it is a film which
affects Arab horses in the damp hot regions of Malabar and
Zanzibar and soon blinds them. This equine cataract combined with
loin-disease compels men to ride Pegu and other ponies.

[FN#554]  Arab. "Zujáj bikr" whose apparent meaning would be
glass in the lump and unworked. Zaj áj bears, however, the
meaning of clove-nails (the ripe bud of the clove-shrub) and may
possibly apply to one of the manifold "Alfáz Adwiyh" (names of
drugs). Here, however, pounded glass would be all sufficient to
blind a horse: it is much used in the East especially for dogs
affected by intestinal vermicules.

[FN#555]  Alluding to the Arab saying "The two rests"
(Al-ráhatáni) "certainty of success or failure," as opposed to
"Wiswás" when the mind fluctuates in doubt.

[FN#556]  She falls in love with the groom, thus anticipating the
noble self-devotion of Miss Aurora Floyd.

[FN#557]  Arab. "Túfán" see vol. v. 156: here it means the
"Deluge of Noah."

[FN#558]  Two of the Hells. See vol. v. 240.

[FN#559]  Lit. "Out upon a prayer who imprecated our parting!"

[FN#560]  The use of masculine for feminine has frequently been
noted. I have rarely changed the gender or the number the plural
being often employed for the singular (vol. i. 98). Such change
may avoid "mystification and confusion" but this is the very
purpose of the substitution which must be preserved if "local
colour" is to be respected.










This Etext prepared by Brett Fishburne (william.fishburne@verizon.net)





"The kinship of blood between nations may grow weaker, but the
kinship of ideals and purposes constitutes a permanent bond of
union."  John Lewis Griffiths





The net proceeds of the sale of this book will be used in aiding
the needy families of the men of the Naval Militia who have been
called to the defense of liberty.





Dedication




To our sailors, soldiers, and nurses in appreciation of their
heroism and sacrifice in the cause of Liberty and Democracy.

"Oh, land of ours be glad of such as these."  Theodosia Garrison.

"To such a task we can dedicate our lives and our fortunes, everything
that we are, and everything that we have, with the pride of those
who know that the day has come when America is privileged to spend
her blood and her might for the principles that gave her birth and
happiness, and the peace which she has treasured.  God helping her,
she can do no other."  Woodrow Wilson.





A Message From Vice Admiral William Sowden Sims, U.S.N., Commanding
the American Naval Forces Operating in European Waters




In such an hour as that with which we are now confronted, when so
much depends upon the individual efforts, our hearts swell with
pride as we learn of the thousands of America's best, staunch and
true men who are so willingly forgetting their own personal welfare
and linking their lives and all that they are with the cause of
liberty and justice, which is so dear to the hears of the American
people.  All honor to those who are giving themselves as such willing
sacrifices, and may God grant that their efforts may be speedily
rewarded by a world condition which will make them realize that
their efforts have accomplished the desired result, and that the
world is better and happier because of them.

[signed] Wm. S. Sims





American Expeditionary Force Office of the Commanding General

August 4th, 1917

I am very pleased to have an opportunity to say a word in praise
of the Militia of Mercy.

Unless our women are imbued with Patriotic sentiments, there will
be little to hope for in our life.  A nation is only as great as
its womanhood; and, as are the women, so are the sons.  All praise
to the women of America!

Please accept my very best wishes for the success of your organization.

[signed] John J. Pershing.





Introduction




I have seldom yielded so willingly to a request for my written
views as I do in this instance, when my valued friend, the master
journalist, Melville E. Stone, has asked me, on behalf of the Book
Committee, to write an introduction for "The Defenders of Democracy."
Needless to say, I comply all the more readily in view of the fact
that the book in which these words will appear is planned by the
ladies of the Militia of Mercy as a means of increasing the Fund
the Society is raising for the benefit of the families of "their
own men" on the battle-line.

And what a theme!  It demands a volume from any pen capable of doing
it justice.  For the present purposes, however, I approve strongly
of a compilation which shall express the reasoned opinions of writers
representing the allied nations, while it is a real pleasure to
turn for a few minutes from the day's anxieties and consider the
one great force which supplies the leaven to a war-sodden world.
Are men to live in freedom or as slaves to a soulless system?--that
is the question which is now being solved in blood and agony and
tears on the battlefields of the Old World.  The answer given by
the New World has never been in doubt, but its clarion note was
necessarily withheld in all its magnificent rhythm until President
Wilson delivered his Message to Congress last April.  I have
no hesitation in saying that Mr. Wilson's utterance will become
immortal.  It is a new declaration of the Rights of Man, but
a finer, broader one, based on the sure principles of Christian
ethics.  Yet, mark how this same nobility of thought and purpose
runs like a vein of gold through the rock of valiant little Belgium's
defiance of the Hun, of President Poincare's firm stand, and of Mr.
Lloyd George's unflinching labors in the Sisyphean task of stemming
the Teutonic avalanche.  Prussia's challenge to the world came with
the shock of some mighty eruption undreamed of by chroniclers of
earthquakes.  It stunned humanity.  Nowhere was its benumbing effect
more perceptible than in these United state, whose traditional
policy of non-interference in European disputes was submitted so
unexpectedly to the fierce test of Right versus Expediency.  And
how splendidly did President, Senator, Congress and the People
respond to the test!  Never for one instant did America's clear
judgment falter.  The Hun was guilty, and must be punished.  The
only issue to be solved was whether France, Britain, Italy and
Russia should convict and brand the felon unaided, or the mighty
power of the Western World should join hands with the avengers of
outraged law.  Well, a purblind Germany settled that uncertainty
by a series of misdeeds which no nation of high ideals could allow
to pass unchallenged.  I do believe most firmly that President
Wilson gave the criminal such chances of reform as no court of law
in the world would grant.  But, at last, his patience was exhausted.
Whether the enslavers of Germany thought, in that crass ignorance
of other men's minds they have so often displayed, that America
meant to keep out of the war at all costs, or were merely careless
of consequences so long as the immediate end was attained, is now
immaterial.  From the welter of Teutonic misdeeds and lies arises
the vital, the soul-inspiring spectacle of a union of all democracies
against the common foe.

And right here, as the direct speech of New York has it, I want to
pay tribute to the sagacity, the clarity of vision, the sure divination
of the truth amidst a fog of deceit, which has characterized almost
the whole Press of the United States since those feverish days at
the end of July, 1914, when the nightmare of war was so quickly
succeeded by its dread reality.  Efforts which might fairly be
described as stupendous were put forth by the advocates of Kultur
to win, if not the approval, at least the strict neutrality of
America.  That the program of calculated misrepresentation failed
utterly was due in great part to the leading newspapers of New York,
Chicago, Philadelphia and the other main centers of industry and
population.  Never has the value of a free Press been demonstrated
so thoroughly.  The American editor is accustomed to weigh the gravest
problems of life on his own account without let or hindrance from
tradition, and it can be affirmed most positively that, excepting
the few instances of a suborned pro-German Press, the newspapers
of the United States condemned the Hun and his methods as roundly
and fearlessly as the "Independence Belge" itself whose staff had
actually witnessed the horrors of Vise and Louvain.  These men
educated and guided public opinion.  Republican or Democrat it
mattered not--they set out to determine from the material before
them what was Right and what was Wrong.  Once convinced that the
Hun was a menace they made their readers understand beyond cavil
just what that menace meant.  So I claim that the editors of the
United States are entitled to high rank among the Defenders of
Democracy.  When the history of the war, or rather a just analysis
of its causes and effects, comes to be written I shall be much
mistaken if the critical historian does not give close heed and
honorable mention to the men who wrote the articles which kept the
millions of America thoroughly and honestly informed.  Think what
it would have meant had their influence been thrown into the scale
against the Allies!  By that awesome imagining alone can the extent
of their service by measured.

If I have wandered a little from my theme, since our veritable
"Defenders" are the men who are giving their life's blood at the
front, and the band of noble women who are tending them in hospital,
it will surely be understood that, if I name them last they are
first in my heart.  I have seen much of the war.  I know what your
soldiers, sailors and nurses are called on to endure.  I rejoice
that in dedicating this book to them, you honor them while they
live.  Never let their memory fade when they are dead.  They gave
their lives for their friends, and greater love than that no man
hath.

[signed]Northcliff





Essential Service




"I wish all success to 'The Defenders of Democracy.'  The men who
are in this war on the part of the United States are doing the one
vitally important work which it is possible for Americans to do at
this time.  Nothing else counts now excepting that we fight this
war to a finish.  Those men are thrice fortunate who are given
the chance to serve under arms at the front.  They are not only
rendering the one essential service to this country and to mankind,
but they are also earning honor as it cannot otherwise be earned
by any men of our generation.  As for the rest of us, our task is
to back them up in every way possible."

[signed]Theodore Roosevelt





Kittery Point, Me., October 14, 1917

I am never good at messages or sentiments, but perhaps if Mr.
Rouland's portrait of me were literally a speaking likeness it
would entreat you to believe that I revere and honor in my heart
and soul, the noble ideals of the Militia of Mercy.

Yours sincerely,

[signed]W. D. Howells.





[The following is written in long hand] How Can I Serve?




There are strange ways of serving God You sweep a room or turn a
sod, And suddenly to your surprise   You hear the whirr of seraphim
And ?uid you're under God's own eyes   And building palaces for
him.

There are strange, unexpected ways Of going soldiering these days
It may be only census-blanks   You're asked to conquer with a pen,
But suddenly you're in the ranks   And fighting for the rights of
men!

[signed]Hermann Hagedorn.

For the Militia of Mercy August 15, 1917.





The Editors gratefully acknowledge the rich contributions to this
book which it has been their privilege to arrange.  The generous
spirit which has accompanied each gift permeates the pages, and
its genial glow will be felt by all of our readers.

The book is only a fire-side talk on the ideals and purposes held
in common by those who belong to the friendly circle of the Allies,
and is not intended to have diplomatic, economic or official
significance.  The Editors, however, have been honored by the
approval of their plan, and have received invaluable assistance from
diplomatists, statesmen and men of affairs in securing contributions
otherwise inaccessible at the present time.

We wish to acknowledge (although we cannot adequately express our
appreciation) the gift from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES of
his portrait, and his kind recognition of our desire to render an
international service.

We are especially indebted to VISCOUNT ISHII, Special Ambassador
from Japan to Washington, D. C., and to LORD NORTHCLIFFE, Chairman
of the British War Mission, for their thoughtful and sympathetic
articles written during days crowded with official duties.

We owe a debt of thanks to HIS EXCELLENCY, the ITALIAN AMBASSADOR,
for the privilege of publishing for the first time in America,
D'ANNUNZIO'S sonnet to GENERAL CADORNA; to THEIR EXCELLENCIES, the
PORTUGUESE, GREEK, and CHINESE MINISTERS, for helpful suggestions
and translations; to MR. WILLIAM PHILLIPS, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
STATE; to MR. JOHN HAYS HAMMOND; to MR. JOHN LANE, MR. W. J. LOCKE,
MRS. THEODORE McKENNA, all of London, England, who assembled our
rich English contributions for us; to MR. WILLIAM DE LEFTWICH DODGE
for the cover design, a rare and beautiful tribute to our defenders;
to MR. MELVILLE E. STONE, without whose personal influence we could
not have secured contributions from all of our Allies in so short
a time; to MR. J. JEFFERSON JONES and MR. WILLIAM DANA ORCUTT, who
have devoted time and thought without stint to the making of the
book, and have given the committee the advantage of their technical
knowledge and distinguished taste entirely as a patriotic service;
to MISS LILIAN ELLIOTT for her many translations from Portuguese
and Spanish writers; to MISS LA MONTAIGNE, CHAIRMAN of THE CARDINAL
MERCIER FUND; to MR. TALCOTT WILLIAMS, MR. ROBERT UNDERWOOD JOHNSON,
MR. DANIAL FROHMAN; to THE BRITISH WAR MISSION, THE FRIENDS OF
FRANCE AND HER ALLIES COMMITTEE, and to THE RUSSIAN AND SERBIAN
CIVIL RELIEF COMMITTEES.  To ALL we give our heartfelt thanks.

THE EDITORS.





Preface




This beautiful book is the expression of the eager desire of all
of the gifted men and women who have contributed to it and of the
members of the Militia of mercy to render homage to our sailors,
soldiers, nurses and physicians who offer the supreme sacrifice
to free the stricken people of other lands and to protect humanity
with their bodies from an enemy who has invented the name and created
the thing "welt-schmerz"--world anguish.  But we want it do more
than extol their heroism and sacrifice, we want The Defenders of
Democracy to help them win the war.  It has been the thought of
those who planned the book to meet three things needful, not only
to the army at the front, but to that vaster army at home who watch
and work and wait (and perhaps we need it more than they who have
the stimulus of action)--to strengthen the realization that our
soldiers of sea and land, though far away, are fighting for a cause
which is vitally near the heart of every man and every woman, and
the soul of every nation--human freedom; "to forge the weapon of
victory by fanning the flame of cheerfulness," and to be the means
of lifting the burden of anxiety from those who go, lest their loved
ones should suffer privation, bereft of their protecting care.  So
truly is this an Age of Service, that the response to the scope
and spirit of our work was immediate and within four months from
the day we sent our first request for co-operation in carrying out
our plans, we had received the rich contributions contained in this
book from men and women of letters and other arts, not only from
our own generous country, but from our allies.

Perhaps the most difficult task fell to those who were asked not
to write of the war but to practice the gentle art of cheering us
all up--an art so easily lost in these days of sorrow, suspense
and anxiety--yet we have received many delightful contributions
in harmony with this request, and so the cheerful note, the finer
optimism, recurs again and again, and is sustained to the last
page.

Such a book is historic.  It is a consecration of the highest gifts
to the cause of human freedom and human fraternity.  The Militia of
Mercy, in expressing its gratitude to the men and women so greatly
endowed who have made this book possible, trust they will find
a rich reward in the thought that it will give both spiritual and
material aid to those who are fighting in the great war.

The book will be sold for the benefit of the families of the men
of the Naval Militia now in the Federal Service and taking part in
sea warfare.  John Lane Company have published the book at cost,
so that the publisher's profits, as well as our own, will be given
to the patriotic work of the Militia of Mercy.

It has been repeatedly said during the past year that America had
not begun to feel the war.  If America has not, how many Americans
there are who have!  We all know that the responsibilities and
inequalities of war were felt first by our sailors.  The whole
outlook on life changed for many families of the Naval Militia the
day after diplomatic relations with Germany were severed.  Husbands,
fathers and sons were called to service without any opportunity to
provide for current expenses or to arrange for the future welfare
of their loved ones.  The burden of providing for the necessities
of life fell suddenly, without warning, upon the wives and mothers
of the civilian sailors.  The world knew nothing of these cases,
but the members of the Militia of Mercy who have visited the needy
families, realize with what heroism, courage and self-sacrifice
the women have done and are doing their part.

For those of us who look on, to help them is not charity, but
opportunity for patriotic service to give a VERY LITTLE to those
who are giving ALL THEY CHERISH and ALL THEY HOLD DEAR for the sake
of human Liberty and Democracy.





Table of Contents




Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States.  A Message. . . .   vi
Vice Admiral William Sowden Sims, U.S.N.  A Message . . . . . . . .  vii
  Commanding the American Naval Forces Operating in European Waters
General John J. Pershing, U.S.A.  A Letter. . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
  Commanding General American Expeditionary Force
Lord Northcliffe.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ix
  Chairman, British War Mission to the United States
Theodore Roosevelt.  Essential Service. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
  Twenty-sixth President of the United States.  Author and 
    Statesman
William Dean Howells.  A Letter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  xiv
  American Author, New York, President of the American Academy of
    Arts and Letters
Hermann Hagedorn.  "How Can I Serve?" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   xv
  American Writer, New York.  President, Vigilantes, American 
    League of Artists and Authors for Patriotic Services
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xvii


Contributions of Writers


Belgium


Gaston De Leval.  Belgium and America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
  Belgian Advocate for Edith Cavell
Emile Cammaerts.  Good Old Bernstorff!  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
  Belgian Poet


China


Tsa Yuan-Pei.  The War in Europe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
  Chancellor of the Government University of Peking
         (Translation, Courtesy of the Chinese Minister)


A Symposium--Democracy


George Sterling.  Invocation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
  American Poet, California
George A. Birmingham.  The Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
  (Canon James O. Hannay) Irish Clergyman and Man of Letters
John Galsworthy.  The New Comradship  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
  English Writer
William J. Locke.  Questionings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
  English Novelist
Henry Van Dyke.  Democracy in Peace and War . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
  American Clergyman, Diplomat and Writer


An Interlude


Harriet Monroe.  Sunrise over the Peristyle . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
  American Poet, Chicago


The Drama


Daniel Frohman.  Reminiscences of Booth . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
  Theatrical Manager and Writer, New York
J. Hartley Manners.  God of My Faith:  A One Act Play . . . . . . .   24
  Dramatist, New York


France


Frederick Coudert.  To France  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44
  American Lawyer and Publicist
Anatole France.  Ce Que Disent Nos Morts . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
  French Author.  (Translation by Emma M. Pope)
Rupert Hughes.  The Transports (Poetical Version of Sully 
      Prud'homme's "Les Berceaux") . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
  American Writer, New York
Stephane Lauzanne.  La Priere du Poilu . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54
  French Writer, Editor Le Matin.  (Translation by Madame Carlo
    Polifeme)


Great Britain


Honourable James M. Beck.  A Tribute to England  . . . . . . . . .   61
  American Lawyer and Publicist
Lord Bryce.  Unity and Peace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   66
  English Statesman and Author
Robert Hichens.  Our Common Heritage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   67
  English Novelist
Stephen McKenna.  Poetic Justice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   69
  English Statesman and Novelist
Lady Aberdeen.  The Spell of the Kilties . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84
  (Wife of the Marquis of Aberdeen and Temair, K. T., Scotland)
Mrs. Belloc Lowndes.  Sherston's Wedding Eve . . . . . . . . . . .   87
  English Novelist, London
Ralph Connor.  A Canadian Soldier's Dominion Day at Shorncliffe  .  105
  Canadian Novelist
Stephen Leacock.  Simple as Day  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  111
  Canadian Writer, Professor McGill University, Montreal
May Sinclair. 