th gold after the usage of Wazirs, and appointed to
them stipends and allowances, bidding them choose out such of the
notables of the kingdom and officers of the troops present at the
banquet as were aptest for the service of the state, that he
might make them Captains of tens and Captains of hundreds and
Captains of thousands and appoint to them dignities and stipends
and assign them provision, after the manner of Grandees. This
they did with entire diligence and he bade them also handsel all
who were present with large gifts and dismiss them each to his
country with honour and renown; he also charged his governors to
rule the people with justice and enjoined them to be tender to
the poor as well as to the rich and bade succour them from the
treasury, according to their several degrees. So the Wazirs
wished him permanence of glory and continuance of life, and he
commanded to decorate the city three days, in gratitude to Allah
Almighty for mercies vouchsafed to him. Such was the case with
the King and his Wazir, Ibn Shimas, in the ordinance of his
kingdom through his Emirs and Governors; but as regards the
favourite women, wives, concubines and others who, by their
malice and perfidy, had brought about the slaughter of the Wazirs
and had well nigh ruined the realm, as soon as the Court was
dissolved and all the people had departed, each to his own place,
after their affairs had been set in order, the King summoned his
boy-Minister, the son of Shimas, and the other six Wazirs and
taking them apart privily, said to them, "Know, O Wazirs that I
have been a wanderer from the right way, drowned in ignorance,
opposed to admonition, a breaker of facts and promises and a
gainsayer of good counsellors; and the cause of all this was my
being fooled by these women and the wiles whereby they beset me
and the glozing lure of their speech, whereby they seduced me to
sin and my acceptance of this, for that I deemed the words of
them true and loyal counsel, by reason of their sweetness and
softness; but lo, and behold! they were deadly poison. And now I
am certified that they sought but to ruin and destroy me,
wherefore they deserve punishment and retribution from me, for
justice sake, that I may make them a warning to whoso will be
warned. And what say your just judgments anent doing them to
die?" Answered the boy Wazir, "O mighty King, I have already told
thee that women are not alone to blame, but that the fault is
shared between them and the men who hearken to them. However,
they deserve punishment and requital for two reasons: firstly for
the fulfilment of thy word, because thou art the supreme King;
and secondly, by reason of their presumption against thee and
their seducing thee and their meddling with that which concerneth
them not and whereof it befitteth them not even to speak.
Wherefore they have right well deserved death; yet let that which
hath befallen them suffice them, and do thou henceforth reduce
them to servants' estate. But it is thine to command in this and
in other than this." Then one of the Wazirs seconded the counsel
of Ibn Shimas; but another of them prostrated himself before the
King and said to him, "Allah prolong the King's life! An thou be
indeed resolved to do with them that which shall cause their
death, do with them as I shall say to thee." Asked Wird Khan,
"And what is that?"; and the Wazir answered, "'Twere best that
thou bid some of thy female slaves carry the women who played
thee false to the apartment, wherein befel the slaughter of thy
Wazirs and wise men and imprison them there; and bid that they be
provided with a little meat and drink, enough to keep life in
their bodies. Let them never be suffered to go forth of that
place, and whenever one of them dies, let her abide among them,
as she is, till they die all, even to the last of them. This is
the least of their desert, because they were the cause of this
great avail, ay, and the origin of all the troubles and
calamities that have befallen in our time; so shall there be
verified in them the saying of the Sayer, 'Whoso diggeth his
brother a pit shall surely himself fall into it, albeit of long
safety he have benefit.'" The King accepted the Wazir's counsel
and sending for four stalwart female slaves, committed the
offending women to them, bidding them bear them into the place of
slaughter and imprison them there and allow them every day a
little coarse food and a little troubled water. They did with
them as he bade; wherefore the women mourned with sore mourning,
repenting them of that which they had done and lamenting with
grievous lamentation. Thus Allah gave them their reward of
abjection in this world and prepared for them torment in the
world to come; nor did they cease to abide in that murky and
noisome place, whilst every day one or other of them died, till
they all perished, even to the last of them;[FN#183] and the
report of this event was bruited abroad in all lands and
countries. This is the end of the story of the King and his
Wazirs and subjects, and praise be to Allah who causeth peoples
to pass away, and quickeneth the bones that rot in decay; Him who
alone is worthy to be glorified and magnified alway and hallowed
for ever and aye! And amongst the tales they tell is one of 




            ABU KIR THE DYER AND ABU SIR THE BARBER.



There dwelt once, in Alexandria city, two men, of whom one was a
dyer, by name Abú Kír, and the other a barber Abú Sír[FN#184];
and they were neighbours in the market-street, where their shops
stood side by side.  The dyer was a swindler and a liar, an
exceeding wicked wight, as if indeed his head-temples were hewn
out of a boulder rock or fashioned of the threshold of a Jewish
synagogue, nor was he ashamed of any shameful work he wrought
amongst the folk.  It was his wont, when any brought him cloth
for staining, first to require of him payment under pretence of
buying dyestuffs therewith.  So the customer would give him the
wage in advance and wend his ways, and the dyer would spend all
he received on meat and drink; after which he would sell the
cloth itself as soon as ever its owner turned his back and waste
its worth in eating and drinking and what not else, for he ate
not but of the daintiest and most delicate viands nor brank but
of the best of that which doth away the with of man.  And when
the owner of the cloth came to him, he would say to him, "Return
to me to-morrow before sunrise and thou shalt find thy stuff
dyed."  So the customer would go away, saying to himself, "One
day is near another day," and return next day at the appointed
time, when the dyer would say to him, "Come to-morrow; yesterday
I was not at work, for I had with me guests and was occupied with
doing what their wants required till they went: but to-morrow
before sunrise come and take thy cloth dyed."  So he would fare
forth and return on the third day, when Abu Kir would say to him,
"Indeed yesterday I was excusable, for my wife was brought to bed
in the night and all day I was busy with manifold matters; but
to-morrow, without fail, come and take thy cloth dyed."  When the
man came again at the appointed time, he would put him off with
some other pretence, it mattered little what, and would swear to
him;--Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that every time
the owner of an article came to the dyer he would put him off
with any pretext[FN#185] and would swear to him; nor would he
cease to promise and swear to him, as often as he came, till the
customer lost patience and said, "How often wilt thou say to me,
'To-morrow?'  Give me my stuff: I will not have it dyed." 
Whereupon the dyer would make answer, "By Allah, O my brother, I
am abashed at thee; but I must tell the truth and may Allah harm
all who harm folk in their goods!"  The other would exclaim,
"Tell me what hath happened;" and Abu Kir would reply, "As for
thy stuff I dyed that same on matchless wise and hung it on the
drying rope but 'twas stolen and I know not who stole it."  If
the owner of the stuff were of the kindly he would say, "Allah
will compensate me;" and if he were of the ill-conditioned, he
would haunt him with exposure and insult, but would get nothing
of him, though he complained of him to the judge.  He ceased not
doing thus till his report was noised abroad among the folk and
each used to warn other against Abu Kir who became a byword
amongst them.  So they all held aloof from him and none would be
entrapped by him save those who were ignorant of his character;
but, for all this, he failed not daily to suffer insult and
exposure from Allah's creatures.  By reason of this his trade
became slack and he used to go to the shop of his neighbour the
barber Abu Sir and sit there, facing the dyery and with his eyes
on the door.  Whenever he espied any one who knew him not
standing at the dyery-door, with a piece of stuff in his hand, he
would leave the barber's booth and go up to him saying, "What
seekest thou, O thou?"; and the man would reply, "Take and dye me
this thing."  So the dyer would ask, "What colour wilt thou have
it?"  For, with all his knavish tricks his hand was in all manner
of dyes; but he was never true to any one; wherefore poverty had
gotten the better of him.  Then he would take the stuff and say,
"Give me my wage in advance and come to-morrow and take the
stuff."  So the stranger would advance him the money and wend his
way; whereupon Abu Kir would carry the cloth to the market-street
and sell it and with its price buy meat and vegetables and
tobacco[FN#186] and fruit and what not else he needed; but,
whenever he saw any one who had given him stuff to dye standing
at the door of his shop, he would not come forth to him or even
show himself to him.  On this wise he abode years and years, till
it fortuned one day that he received cloth to dye from a man of
wrath and sold it and spent the proceeds.  The owner came to him
every day, but found him not in his shop; for, whenever he espied
any one who had claim against him, he would flee from him into
the shop of the barber Abu Sir.  At last, that angry man finding
that he was not to be seen and growing weary of such work,
repaired to the Kazi and bringing one of his serjeants to the
shop, nailed up the door, in presence of a number of Moslems, and
sealed it, for that he saw therein naught save some broken pans
of earthenware to stand him instead of his stuff; after which the
serjeant took the key, saying to the neighbours, "Tell him to
bring back this man's cloth then come to me[FN#187] and take his
shop key;" and went his way, he and the man.  Then said Abu Sir
to Abu Kir, "What ill business is this?[FN#188] Whoever bringeth
thee aught thou losest it for him.  What hath become of this
angry man's stuff?"  Answered the dyer, "O my neighbour, 'twas
stolen from me."  "Prodigous!" exclaimed the barber.  "Whenever
any one giveth thee aught, a thief stealeth it from thee!  Art
thou then the meeting-place of every rogue upon town?  But I
doubt me thou liest: so tell me the truth."  Replied Abu Kir, "O
my neighbour, none hath stolen aught from me."  Asked Abu Sir,
"What then dost thou with the people's property?"; and the dyer
answered, "Whenever any one giveth me aught to dye, I sell it and
spend the price."  Quoth Abu Sir, "Is this permitted thee of
Allah?" and quoth Abu Kir, "I do this only out of poverty,
because business is slack with me and I am poor and have
nothing."[FN#189]  And he went on to complain to him of the
dulness of his trade and his lack of means.  Abu Sir in like
manner lamented the little profit of his own calling, saying, "I
am a master of my craft and have not my equal in this city; but
no one cometh to me to be polled, because I am a pauper; and I
loathe this art and mystery, O my brother."  Abu Kir replied,
"And I also loathe my own craft, by reason of its slackness; but,
O my brother, what call is there for abiding in this town?  Let
us depart from it, I and thou, and solace ourselves in the lands
of mankind, carrying in our hands our crafts which are in demand
all the world over; so shall we breathe the air and rest from
this grievous trouble."  And he ceased not to commend travel to
Abu Sir, till the barber became wishful to set out; so they
agreed upon their route,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
Kir ceased not his praises of wayfaring to Abu Sir till the
barber became wishful to depart; so they agreed upon their route,
at which decision Abu Kir rejoiced and improvised these lines,

"Leave thy home for abroad an wouldst rise on high, * And travel
     whence benefits five-fold rise;
The soothing of sorrow and winning of bread, * Knowledge, manners
     and commerce with good men and wise.
An they say that in travel are travail and care, * And disunion
     of friends and much hardship that tries;
Yet to generous youth death is better than life * In the house of
     contempt betwixt haters and spies."

When they agreed to travel together Abu Kir said to Abu Sir, "O
my neighbour, we are become brethren and there is no difference
between us, so it behoveth us to recite the Fátihah[FN#190] that
he of us who gets work shall of his gain feed him who is out of
work, and whatever is left, we will lay in a chest; and when we
return to Alexandria, we will divide it fairly and equally."  "So
be it," replied Abu Sir, and they repeated the Opening Chapter of
the Koran on this understanding.  Then Abu Sir locked up his shop
and gave the key to its owner, whilst Abu Kir left his door
locked and sealed and let the key lie with the Kazi's serjeant;
after which they took their baggage and embarked on the morrow in
a galleon[FN#191] upon the salt sea.  They set sail the same day
and fortune attended them, for, of Abu Sir's great good luck,
there was not a barber in the ship albeit it carried an hundred
and twenty men, besides captain and crew.  So, when they loosed
the sails, the barber said to the dyer, "O my brother, this is
the sea and we shall need meat and drink; we have but little
provaunt with us and haply the voyage will be long upon us;
wherefore methinks I will shoulder my budget and pass among the
passengers, and may be some one will say to me, 'Come hither, O
barber, and shave me,' and I will shave him for a scone or a
silver bit or a draught of water: so shall we profit by this, I
and thou too."  "There's no harm in that," replied the dyer and
laid down his head and slept, whilst the barber took his gear and
water-tasse[FN#192] and throwing over his shoulder a rag, to
serve as napkin (because he was poor), passed among the
passengers.  Quoth one of them, "Ho, master, come and shave me." 
So he shaved him, and the man gave him a half-dirham;[FN#193]
whereupon quoth Abu Sir, "O my brother, I have no use for this
bit; hadst thou given me a scone 'twere more blessed to me in
this sea, for I have a shipmate and we are short of provision." 
So he gave him a loaf and a slice of cheese and filled him the
tasse with sweet water.  The barber carried all this to Abu Kir
and said, "Eat the bread and cheese and drink the water." 
Accordingly he ate and drank, whilst Abu Sir again took up his
shaving gear and, tasse in hand and rag on shoulder, went round
about the deck among the passengers.  One man he shaved for two
scones and another for a bittock of cheese, and he was in demand,
because there was no other barber on board.  Also he bargained
with every one who said to him, "Ho, master, shave me!" for two
loaves and a half dirham, and they gave him whatever he sought,
so that, by sundown, he had collected thirty loaves and thirty
silvers with store of cheese and olives and botargoes.[FN#194]
And besides these he got from the passengers whatever he asked
for and was soon in possession of things galore.  Amongst the
rest he shaved the Captain,[FN#195] to whom he complained of his
lack of victual for the voyage, and the skipper said to him,
"Thou art welcome to bring thy comrade every night and sup with
me and have no care for that so long as ye sail with us."  Then
he returned to the dyer, whom he found asleep; so he roused him;
and when Abu Kir awoke, he saw at his head an abundance of bread
and cheese and olives and botargoes and said, "Whence gottest
thou all this?"  "From the bounty of Allah Almighty," replied Abu
Sir.  Then Abu Kir would have fallen to, but the barber said to
him, "Eat not of this, O my brother; but leave it to serve us
another time; for know that I shaved the Captain and complained
to him of our lack of victual: whereupon quoth he, 'Welcome to
thee!  Bring thy comrade and sup both of ye with me every night.' 
And this night we sup with him for the first time."  But Abu Kir
replied, "My head goeth round with sea-sickness and I cannot rise
from my stead; so let me sup off these things and fare thou alone
to the Captain."  Abu Sir replied, "There is no harm in that;"
and sat looking at the other as he ate, and saw him hew off
gobbets, as the quarryman heweth stone from the hill-quarries and
gulp them down with the gulp of an elephant which hath not eaten
for days, bolting another mouthful ere he had swallowed the
previous one and glaring the while at that which was before him
with the glowering of a Ghul, blowing and blowing as bloweth the
hungry bull over his beans and bruised straw.  Presently up came
a sailor and said to the barber, "O craftsmaster, the Captain
biddeth thee come to supper and bring thy comrade."  Quoth the
barber to the dyer, "Wilt thou come with us?"; but quoth he, "I
cannot walk."  So the barber went by himself and found the
Captain sitting before a tray whereon were a score or more of
dishes and all the company were awaiting him and his mate.  When
the Captain saw him he asked, "Where is thy friend?"; and Abu Sir
answered, "O my lord, he is sea-sick."  Said the skipper, "That
will do him no harm; his sickness will soon pass off; but do thou
carry him his supper and come back, for we tarry for thee."  Then
he set apart a porringer of Kabábs and putting therein some of
each dish, till there was enough for ten, gave it to Abu Sir,
saying, "Take this to thy chum."  He took it and carried it to
the dyer, whom he found grinding away with his dog-teeth[FN#196]
at the food which was before him, as he were a camel, and heaping
mouthful on mouthful in his hurry.  Quoth Abu Sir, "Did I not say
to thee, 'Eat not of this'?  Indeed the Captain is a kindly man. 
See what he hath sent thee, for that I told him thou wast
sea-sick."  "Give it here," cried the dyer.  So the barber gave
him the platter, and he snatched it from him and fell upon his
food, ravening for it and resembling a grinning dog or a raging
lion or a Rukh pouncing on a pigeon or one well-nigh dead for
hunger who seeing meat falls ravenously to eat.  Then Abu Sir
left him and going back to the Captain, supped and enjoyed
himself and drank coffee[FN#197] with him; after which he
returned to Abu Kir and found he had eaten all that was in the
porringer and thrown it aside, empty.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
Sir returned to Abu Kir he saw that he had eaten all that was in
the porringer and had thrown it aside empty.  So he took it up
and gave it to one of the Captain's servants, then went back to
Abu Kir and slept till the morning.  On the morrow, he continued
to shave, and all he got by way of meat and drink he gave to his
shipmate, who ate and drank and sat still, rising not save to do
what none could do for him, and every night the barber brought
him a full porringer from the Captain's table.  They fared thus
twenty days until the galleon cast anchor in the harbour of a
city; whereupon they took leave of the skipper and landing,
entered the town and hired them a closet in a Khan.  Abu Sir
furnished it and buying a cooking pot and a platter and
spoons[FN#198] and what else they needed, fetched meat and cooked
it; but Abu Kir fell asleep the moment he entered the
Caravanserai and awoke not till Abu Sir aroused him and set a
tray of food[FN#199] before him.  When he awoke, he ate and
saying to Abu Sir, "Blame me not, for I am giddy," fell asleep
again.  Thus he did forty days, whilst, every day, the barber
took his gear and making the round of the city, wrought for that
which fell to his lot,[FN#200] and returning, found the dyer
asleep and aroused him.  The moment he awoke he fell ravenously
upon the food, eating as one who cannot have his fill nor be
satisfied; after which he went asleep again.  On this wise he
passed other forty days and whenever the barber said to him, "Sit
up and be comfortable[FN#201] and go forth and take an airing in
the city, for 'tis a gay place and a pleasant and hath not its
equal among the cities," he would reply, "Blame me not, for I am
giddy."  Abu Sir cared not to hurt his feelings nor give him hard
words; but, on the forty-first day, he himself fell sick and
could not go abroad; so he engaged the porter of the Khan to
serve them both, and he did the needful for them and brought them
meat and drink whilst Abu Kir would do nothing but eat and sleep. 
The man ceased not to wait upon them on this wise for four days,
at the end of which time the barber's malady redoubled on him,
till he lost his senses for stress of sickness; and Abu Kir,
feeling the sharp pangs of hunger, arose and sought in his
comrade's clothes, where he found a thousand silver bits.  He
took them and, shutting the door of the closet upon Abu Sir,
fared forth without telling any; and the doorkeeper was then at
market and thus saw him not go out.  Presently Abu Kir betook
himself to the bazar and clad himself in costly clothes, at a
price of five hundred half-dirhams; then he proceeded to walk
about the streets and divert himself by viewing the city which he
found to be one whose like was not among cities; but he noted
that all its citizens were clad in clothes of white and blue,
without other colour.  Presently he came to a dyer's and seeing
naught but blue in his shop, pulled out to him a kerchief and
said, "O master, take this and dye it and win thy wage."  Quoth
the dyer, "The cost of dyeing this will be twenty dirhams;" and
quoth Abu Kir, "In our country we dye it for two."  "Then go and
dye it in your own country!  As for me, my price is twenty
dirhams and I will not bate a little thereof."  "What colour wilt
thou dye it?"  "I will dye it blue."  "But I want it dyed red." 
"I know not how to dye red."  "Then dye it green."  "I know not
how to dye green."  "Yellow."  "Nor yet yellow."  Thereupon Abu
Kir went on to name the different tints to him, one after other,
till the dyer said, "We are here in this city forty masterdyers,
not one more nor one less; and when one of us dieth, we teach his
son the craft.  If he leave no son, we abide lacking one, and if
he leave two sons, we teach one of them the craft, and if he die,
we teach his brother.  This our craft is strictly ordered, and we
know how to dye but blue and no other tine whatsoever."  Then
said Abu Kir, "Know that I too am a dyer and wot how to dye all
colours; and I would have thee take me into thy service on hire,
and I will teach thee everything of my art, so thou mayst glory
therein over all the company of dyers."  But the dyer answered,
"We never admit a stranger into our craft."  Asked Abu Kir, "And
what if I open a dyery for myself?"; whereto the other answered,
"We will not suffer thee to do that on any wise;"  whereupon he
left him and going to a second dyer, made him the like proposal;
but he returned him the same answer as the first; and he ceased
not to go from one to other, till he had made the round of the
whole forty masters; but they would not accept him either to
master or apprentice.  Then he repaired to the Shaykh of the
Dyers and told him what had passed, and he said, "We admit no
strangers into our craft."  Hereupon Abu Kir became exceeding
wroth and going up to the King of that city, made complaint to
him, saying, "O King of the age, I am a stranger and a dyer by
trade"; and he told him whatso had passed between himself and the
dyers of the town, adding, "I can dye various kinds of red, such
as rose-colour and jujubel-colour[FN#202] and various kinds of
green, such as grass-green and pistachio-green and olive and
parrot's wing, and various kinds of black, such as coal-black and
Kohl-black, and various shades of yellow, such as orange and
lemon-colour," and went on to name to him the rest of the
colours.  Then said he, "O King of the age, all the dyers in thy
city can not turn out of hand any one of these tincts, for they
know not how to dye aught but blue; yet will they not admit me
amongst them, either to master or apprentice."  Answered the
King, "Thou sayst sooth for that matter, but I will open to thee
a dyery and give thee capital and have thou no care anent them;
for whoso offereth to do thee let or hindrance, I will hang him
over his shop-door."  Then he sent for builders and said to them,
"Go round about the city with this master-dyer, and whatsoever
place pleaseth him, be it shop or Khan or what not, turn out its
occupier and build him a dyery after his wish.  Whatsoever he
biddeth you, that do ye and oppose him not in aught."  And he
clad him in a handsome suit and gave him two white slaves to
serve him, and a horse with housings of brocade and a thousand
dinars, saying, "Expend this upon thyself against the building be
completed."  Accordingly Abu Kir donned the dress and mounting
the horse, became as he were an Emir.  Moreover the King assigned
him a house and bade furnish it; so they furnished it for
him.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
assigned a house to Abu Kir and bade furnish it and he took up
his abode therein.  On the morrow he mounted and rode through the
city, whilst the architects went before him; and he looked about
him till he saw a place which pleased him and said, "This stead
is seemly;" whereupon they turned out the owner and carried him
to the King, who gave him as the price of his holding, what
contented him and more.  Then the builders fell to work, whilst
Abu Kir said to them, "Build thus and thus and do this and that,"
till they built him a dyery that had not its like; whereupon he
presented himself before the King and informed him that they had
done building the dyery and that there needed but the price of
the dye-stuffs and gear to set it going.  Quoth the King, "Take
these four thousand dinars to thy capital and let me see the
first fruits of thy dyery."  So he took the money and went to the
market where, finding dye-stuffs[FN#203] plentiful and well-nigh
worthless, he bought all he needed of materials for dyeing; and
the King sent him five hundred pieces of stuff, which he set
himself to dye of all colours and then he spread them before the
door of his dyery.  When the folk passed by the shop, they saw a
wonder-sight whose like they had never in their lives seen; so
they crowded about the entrance, enjoying the spectacle and
questioning the dyer and saying, "O master, what are the names of
these colours?"  Quoth he, "This is red and that yellow and the
other green" and so on, naming the rest of the colours.  And they
fell to bringing him longcloth and saying to him, "Dye it for us
like this and that and take what hire thou seekest."  When he had
made an end of dyeing the King's stuffs, he took them and went up
with them to the Divan; and when the King saw them he rejoiced in
them and bestowed abundant bounty on the dyer.  Furthermore, all
the troops brought him stuffs, saying, "Dye for us thus and
thus;" and he dyed for them to their liking, and they threw him
gold and silver.  After this his fame spread abroad and his shop
was called the Sultan's Dyery.  Good came in to him at every door
and none of the other dyers could say a word to him, but they
used to come to him kissing his hands and excusing themselves to
him for past affronts they had offered him and saying, "Take us
to thine apprentices."  But he would none of them for he had
become the owner of black slaves and handmaids and had amassed
store of wealth.  On this wise fared it with Abu Kir; but as
regards Abu Sir, after the closet door had been locked on him and
his money had been stolen, he abode prostrate and unconscious for
three successive days, at the end of which the Concierge of the
Khan, chancing to look at the door, observed that it was locked
and bethought himself that he had not seen and heard aught of the
two companions for some time.  So he said in his mind, "Haply
they have made off, without paying rent,[FN#204] or perhaps they
are dead, or what is to do with them?"  And he waited till
sunset, when he went up to the door and heard the barber groaning
within.  He saw the key in the lock; so he opened the door and
entering, found Abu Sir lying, groaning, and said to him, "No
harm to thee: where is thy friend?"  Replied Abu Sir, "By Allah,
I came to my senses only this day and called out; but none
answered my call.  Allah upon thee, O my brother, look for the
purse under my head and take from it five half-dirhams and buy me
somewhat nourishing, for I am sore anhungered."  The porter put
out his hand and taking the purse, found it empty and said to the
barber, "The purse is empty; there is nothing in it."  Whereupon
Abu Sir knew that Abu Kir had taken that which was therein and
had fled and he asked the porter, "Hast thou not seen my friend?" 
Answered the doorkeeper, "I have not seen him these three days;
and indeed methought you had departed, thou and he."  The barber
cried, "Not so; but he coveted my money and took it and fled
seeing me sick."  Then he fell a-weeping and a-wailing but the
doorkeeper said to him, "No harm shall befal thee, and Allah will
requite him his deed."  So he went away and cooked him some
broth, whereof he ladled out a plateful and brought it to him;
nor did he cease to tend him and maintain him with his own monies
for two months' space, when the barber sweated[FN#205] and the
Almighty made him whole of his sickness.  Then he stood up and
said to the porter, "An ever the Most High Lord enable me, I will
surely requite thee of thy kindness to me; but none requiteth
save the Lord of His bounty!"  Answered the porter, "Praised be
He for thy recovery!  I dealt not thus with thee but of desire
for the face of Allah the Bountiful."  Then the barber went forth
of the Khan and threaded the market-streets of the town, till
Destiny brought him to the bazar wherein was Abu Kir's dyery, and
he saw the vari-coloured stuffs dispread before the shop and a
jostle of folk crowding to look upon them.  So he questioned one
of the townsmen and asked him, "What place is this and how cometh
it that I see the folk crowding together?"; whereto the man
answered, saying, "This is the Sultan's Dyery, which he set up
for a foreigner Abu Kir hight; and whenever he dyeth new stuff,
we all flock to him and divert ourselves by gazing upon his
handiwork, for we have no dyers in our land who know how to stain
with these colours; and indeed there befel him with the dyers who
are in the city that which befel."[FN#206] And he went on to tell
him all that had passed between Abu Kir and the master-dyers and
how he had complained of them to the Sultan who took him by the
hand and built him that dyery and give him this and that: brief,
he recounted to him all that had occurred.  At this the barber
rejoiced and said in himself, "Praised be Allah who hath
prospered him, so that he is become a master of his craft!  And
the man is excusable, for of a surety he hath been diverted from
thee by his work and hath forgotten thee; but thou actedst kindly
by him and entreatedst him generously, what time he was out of
work; so, when he seeth thee, he will rejoice in thee and entreat
thee generously, even as thou entreatedst him."  According he
made for the door of the dyery and saw Abu Kir seated on a high
mattress spread upon a bench beside the doorway, clad in royal
apparel and attended by four blackamoor slaves and four white
Mamelukes all robed in the richest of raiment.  Moreover, he saw
the workmen, ten negro slaves, standing at work; for, when Abu
Kir bought them, he taught them the craft of dyeing, and he
himself sat amongst his cushions, as he were a Grand Wazir or a
mighty monarch putting his hand to naught, but only saying to the
men, "Do this and do that."  So the barber went up to him and
stood before him, deeming he would rejoice in him when he saw him
and salute him and entreat him with honour and make much of him;
but, when eye fell upon eye, the dyer said to him, "O scoundrel,
how many a time have I bidden thee stand not at the door of the
workshop?  Hast thou a mind to disgrace me with the folk,
thief[FN#207] that thou art?  Seize him."  So the blackamoors ran
at him and laid hold of him; and the dyer rose up from his seat
and said, "Throw him."  Accordingly they threw him down and Abu
Kir took a stick and dealt him an hundred strokes on the back;
after which they turned him over and he beat him other hundred
blows on his belly.  Then he said to him, "O scoundrel, O
villian, if ever again I see thee standing at the door of this
dyery, I will forthwith send thee to the King, and he will commit
thee to the Chief of Police, that he may strike thy neck. 
Begone, may Allah not bless thee!"  So Abu Sir departed from him,
broken-hearted by reason of the beating and shame that had
betided him; whilst the bystanders asked Abu Kir, "What hath this
man done?"  He answered, "The fellow is a thief, who stealeth the
stuffs of folk."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
Kir beat Abu Sir and thrust him forth he said to those present,
"He is a thief who stealeth the stuffs of folk; he hath robbed me
of cloth, how many a time! and I still said in myself, 'Allah
forgive him!'  He is a poor man; and I cared not to deal roughly
with him; so I used to give my customers the worth of their goods
and forbid him gently; but he would not be forbidden: and if he
come again, I will send him to the King, who will put him to
death and rid the people of his mischief."  And the bystanders
fell to abusing the barber after his back was turned.  Such was
the behaviour of Abu Kir; but as regards Abu Sir, he returned to
the Khan, where he sat pondering that which the dyer had done by
him and he remained seated till the burning of the beating
subsided, when he went out and walked about the markets of the
city.  Presently, he bethought him to go to the Hammam bath; so
he said to one of the townsfolk, "O my brother, which is the way
to the Baths?"  Quoth the man, "And what manner of thing may the
Baths be?" and quoth Abu Sir, "'Tis a place where people wash
themselves and do away their dirt and defilements, and it is of
the best of the good things of the world."  Replied the townsman,
"Get thee to the sea," but the barber rejoined, "I want the
Hammam-baths."  Cried the other, "We know not what manner of this
is the Hammam, for we all resort to the sea; even the King, when
he would wash, betaketh himself to the sea."  When Abu Sir was
assured that there was no bath in the city and that the folk knew
not the Baths nor the fashion thereof, he betook himself to the
King's Divan and kissing ground between his hands called down
blessings on him and said, "I am a stranger and a Bath-man by
trade, and I entered thy city and thought to go to the Hammam;
but found not one therein.  How cometh a city of this comely
quality to lack a Hammam, seeing that the bath is of the highest
of the delights of this world?"  Quoth the King, "What manner of
thing is the Hammam?"  So Abu Sir proceeded to set forth to him
the quality of the bath, saying, "Thy capital will not be a
perfect city till there be a Hammam therein."  "Welcome to thee!"
said the King and clad him in a dress that had not its like and
gave him a horse and two blackamoor slaves, presently adding four
handmaids and as many white Mamelukes: he also appointed him a
furnished house and honoured him yet more abundantly than he had
honoured the dyer.  After this he sent builders with him saying
to them, "Build him a Hammam in what place soever shall please
him."  So he took them and went with them through the midst of
the city, till he saw a stead that suited him.  He pointed it out
to the builders and they set to work, whilst he directed them,
and they wrought till they builded him a Hammam that had not its
like.  Then he bade them paint it, and they painted it rarely, so
that it was a delight to the beholders; after which Abu Sir went
up to the King and told him that they had made an end of building
and decorating the Hammam, adding, "There lacketh naught save the
furniture."  The King gave him ten thousand dinars wherewith he
furnished the Bath and ranged the napkins on the ropes; and all
who passed by the door stared at it and their mind confounded at
its decorations.  So the people crowded to this spectacle, whose
like they had never in their lives seen, and solaced themselves
by staring at it and saying, "What is this thing?"  To which Abu
Sir replied, "This is a Hammam;" and they marvelled thereat. 
Then he heated water and set the bath aworking,[FN#208] and he
made a jetting fountain in the great basin, which ravished the
wit of all who saw it of the people of the city.  Furthermore, he
sought of the King ten Mamelukes not yet come to manhood, and he
gave him ten boys like moons; whereupon Abu Sir proceeded to
shampoo them, saying, "Do in this wise with the bathers."  Then
he burnt perfumes and sent out a crier to cry aloud in the city,
saying, "O creatures of Allah, get ye to the Baths which be
called the Sultan's Hammam!"  So the lieges came thither and Abu
Sir bade the slave-boys wash their bodies.  The folk went down
into the tank and coming forth, seated themselves on the raised
pavement, whilst the boys shampooed them, even as Abu Sir had
taught them; and they continued to enter the Hammam and do their
need therein gratis and go out, without paying, for the space of
three days.  On the fourth day the barber invited the King, who
took horse with his Grandees and rode to the Baths, where he put
off his clothes and entered; then Abu Sir came in to him and
rubbed his body with the bag-gloves, peeling from his skin
dirt-rolls like lamp-wicks and showing them to the King, who
rejoiced therein, and clapping his hand upon his limbs heard them
ring again for very smoothness and cleanliness[FN#209]; after
which thorough washing Abu Sir mingled rose-water with the water
of the tank and the King went down therein.  When he came forth,
his body was refreshed and he felt a lightness and liveliness
such as he had never known in his life.  Then the barber made him
sit on the dais and the boys proceeded to shampoo him, whilst the
censers fumed with the finest lign-aloes.[FN#210] Then said the
King, "O master is this the Hammam?"; and Abu Sir said, "Yes." 
Quoth the King, "As my head liveth, my city is not become a city
indeed but by this Bath," presently adding, "But what pay takest
thou for each person?"  Quoth Abu Sir, "That which thou biddest
will I take;" whereupon the King cried, "Take a thousand gold
pieces for every one who washeth in thy Hammam."  Abu Sir,
however, said, "Pardon, O King of the age!  All men are not
alike, but there are amongst them rich and poor, and if I take of
each a thousand dinars, the Hammam will stand empty, for the poor
man cannot pay this price."  Asked the King, "How then wilt thou
do for the price!"; and the barber answered, "I will leave it to
their generosity.[FN#211]  Each who can afford aught shall pay
that which his soul grudgeth not to give, and we will take from
every man after the measure of his means.  On this wise will the
folk come to us and he who is wealthy shall give according to his
station and he who is wealth-less shall give what he can afford. 
Under such condition the Hammam will still be at work and prosper
exceedingly; but a thousand dinars is a Monarch's gift, and not
every man can avail to this."  The Lords of the Realm confirmed
Abu Sir's words, saying, "This is the truth, O King of the age! 
Thinkest thou that all folk are like unto thee, O glorious
King[FN#212]?"  The King replied, "Ye say sooth; but this man is
a stranger and poor and 'tis incumbent on us to deal generously
with him, for that he hath made in our city this Hammam whose
like we have never in our lives seen and without which our city
were not adorned nor hath gotten importance; wherefore, an we
favour him with increase of fee 'twill not be much."  But the
Grandees said, "An thou wilt guerdon him be generous with thine
own monies, and let the King's bounty be extended to the poor by
means of the low price of the Hammam, so the lieges may bless
thee; but, as for the thousand dinars, we are the Lords of thy
Land, yet do our souls grudge to pay it; and how then should the
poor be pleased to afford it?"  Quoth the King, "O my Grandees,
for this time let each of you give him an hundred dinars and a
Mameluke, a slave girl and a blackamoor;" and quoth they, "'Tis
well; we will give it; but after to-day whoso entereth shall give
him only what he can afford, without grudging."  "No harm in
that," said the King; and they gave him the thousand gold pieces
and three chattels.  Now the number of the Nobles who were washed
with the King that day was four hundred souls;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
number of the Nobles who were washed with the King that day were
four hundred souls; so that the total of that which they gave him
was forty thousand dinars, besides four hundred Mamelukes and a
like number of negroes and slave-girls.[FN#213]  Moreover the
King gave him ten thousand dinars, besides ten white slaves and
ten hand-maidens and a like number of blackamoors; whereupon
coming forward Abu Sir kissed the ground before him and said, "O
auspicious Sovereign, lord of justice, what place will contain me
all these women and slaves?"  Quoth the King, "O weak o wit, I
bade not my nobles deal thus with thee but that we might gather
together unto thee wealth galore; for may be thou wilt bethink
thee of thy country and family and repine for them and be minded
to return to thy mother-land; so shalt thou take from our country
muchel of money to maintain thyself withal, what while thou
livest in thine own country."  And quoth Abu Sir, "O King of the
age, (Allah advance thee!) these white slaves and women and
negroes befit only Kings and hadst thou ordered me ready money,
it were more profitable to me than this army; for they must eat
and drink and dress, and whatever betideth me of wealth, it will
not suffice for their support."  The King laughed and said, "By
Allah thou speakest sooth!  They are indeed a mighty host, and
thou hast not the wherewithal to maintain them; but wilt thou
sell them to me for an hundred dinars a head?"  Said Abu Sir, "I
sell them to thee at that price."  So the King sent to his
treasurer for the coin and he brought it and gave Abu Sir the
whole of the price without abatement[FN#214] and in full tale;
after which the King restored the slaves take them; for they are
a gift from me to you."  So they obeyed his bidding and took each
what belonged to him; whilst Abu Sir said to the King, "Allah
ease thee, O King of the age, even as thou hast eased me of these
Ghuls, whose bellies none may fill save Allah[FN#215]!"  The King
laughed, and said he spake sooth; then, taking the Grandees of
his Realm from the Hammam returned to his palace; but the barber
passed the night in counting out his gold and laying it up in
bags and sealing them; and he had with him twenty black slaves
and a like number of Mamelukes and four slave girls to serve him. 
Now when morning morrowed, he opened the Hammam and sent out a
crier to cry, saying, "Whoso entereth the Baths and washeth shall
give that which he can afford and which his generosity requireth
him to give."  Then he seated himself by the pay-chest[FN#216]
and customers flocked in upon him, each putting down that which
was easy to him, nor had eventide evened ere the chest was full
of the good gifts of Allah the Most High.  Presently the Queen
desired to go to the Hammam, and when this came to Abu Sir's
knowledge, he divided the day on her account into two parts,
appointing that between dawn and noon to men and that between
midday and sundown to women.[FN#217]  As soon as the Queen came,
he stationed a handmaid behind the pay-chest; for he had taught
four slave-girls the service of the Hammam, so that they were
become expert bathwomen and tire-women.  When the Queen entered,
this pleased her and her breast waxed broad and she laid down a
thousand dinars.  Thus his report was noised abroad in the city,
and all who entered the bath he entreated with honour, were they
rich or poor; good came in upon him at every door and he made
acquaintance with the royal guards and got him friends and
intimates.  The King himself used to come to him one day in every
week, leaving with him a thousand dinars and the other days were
for rich and poor alike; and he was wont to deal courteously with
the folk and use them with the utmost respect.  It chanced that
the King's sea-captain came in to him one day in the bath; so Abu
Sir did off his dress and going in with him, proceeded to shampoo
him and entreated him with exceeding courtesy.  When he came
forth, he made him sherbet and coffee; and when he would have
given him somewhat, he swore that he would not accept him from
aught.  So the captain was under obligation to him, by reason of
his exceeding kindness and courtesy and was perplexed how to
requite the bath-man his generous dealing.  Thus fared it with
Abu Sir: but as regards Abu Kir, hearing all the people
recounting wonders of the Baths and saying, "Verily, this Hammam
is the Paradise of this world!  Inshallah, O such an one, thou
shalt go with us to-morrow to this delightful bath," he said to
himself, "Needs must I fare like the rest of the world, and see
this bath that hath taken folk's wits."  So he donned his richest
dress and mounting a she-mule and bidding the attendance of four
white slaves and four blacks, walking before and behind him, he
rode to the Hammam.  When he alighted at the door, he smelt the
scent of burning aloes-wood and found people going in and out and
the benches full of great and small.  So he entered the vestibule
and saw Abu Sir, who rose to him and rejoiced in him: but the
dyer said to him, "Is this the way of well-born men?  I have
opened me a dyery and am become master-dyer of the city and
acquainted with the King and have risen to prosperity and
authority: yet camest thou not to me nor askest of me nor saidst,
Where's my comrade?  For my part I sought thee in vain and sent
my slaves and servants to make search for thee in all the Khans
and other places; but they knew not whither thou hadst gone, nor
could any one give me tidings of thee."  Said Abu Sir, "Did I not
come to thee and didst thou not make me out a thief and bastinado
me and dishonour me before the world?"  At this Abu Kir made a
show of concern and asked, "What manner of talk is this?  Was it
thou whom I beat?"; and Abu Sir answered, "Yes, 'twas I." 
Whereupon Abu Kir swore to him a thousand oaths that he knew him
not and said, "There was a fellow like thee, who used to come
every day and steal the people's stuff, and I took thee for him." 
And he went on to pretend penitence, beating hand upon hand and
saying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great?  Indeed we have sinned against thee; but
would that thou hadst discovered thyself to me and said, I am
such an one!  Indeed the fault is with thee, for that thou madest
not thyself known unto me, more especially seeing that I was
distracted for much business."  Replied Abu Sir, "Allah pardon
thee,[FN#218] O my comrade!  This was foreordained in the Secret
Purpose, and reparation is with Allah.  Enter and put off thy
clothes and bathe at thine ease."  Said the dyer, "I conjure
thee, by Allah, O my brother, forgive me!"; and said Abu Sir,
"Allah acquit thee of blame and forgive thee!  Indeed this thing
was decreed to me from all eternity."  Then asked Abu Kir,
"Whence gottest thou this high degree?"; and answered Abu Sir,
"He who prospered thee prospered me; for I went up to the King
and described to him the fashion of the Hammam and he bade me
build one."  And the dyer said, "Even as thou art beknown of the
King, so also am I;"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
Kir and Abu Sir were exchanging reproof and excuse, the dyer said
to him, "Even as thou art beknown of the King, so also am I; and,
Inshallah,-God willing-I will make him love and favour thee more
than ever, for my sake, he knoweth not that thou art my comrade,
but I will acquaint him of this and commend thee to him."  But
Abu Sir said, "There needeth no commendation; for He who moveth
man's heart to love still liveth; and indeed the King and all his
court affect me and have given me this and that."  And he told
him the whole tale and said to him, "Put off thy clothes behind
the chest and enter the Hammam, and I will go in with thee and
rub thee down with the glove."  So he doffed his dress and Abu
Sir, entering the bath with him, soaped him and gloved him and
then dressed him and busied himself with his service till he came
forth, when he brought him dinner and sherbets, whilst all the
folk marvelled at the honour he did him.  Then Abu Kir would have
given him somewhat; but he swore that he would not accept aught
from him and said to him, "Shame upon such doings!  Thou art my
comrade, and there is no difference between us."  Then Abu Kir
observed, "By Allah, O my comrade, this is a mighty fine Hammam
of thine, but there lacketh somewhat in its ordinance."  Asked
Abu Sir, "And what is that?" and Abu Kir answered, "It is the
depilatory,[FN#219] to wit, the paste compounded of yellow
arsenic and quicklime which removeth the hair with comfort.  Do
thou prepare it and next time the King cometh, present it to him,
teaching him how he shall cause the hair to fall off by such
means, and he will love thee with exceeding love and honour
thee."  Quoth Abu Sir, "Thou speakest sooth, and Inshallah, I
will at once make it."  Then Abu Kir left him and mounted his
mule and going to the King said to him, "I have a warning to give
thee, O King of the age!"  "And what is thy warning?" asked the
King; and Abu Kir answered, "I hear that thou hast built a
Hammam."  Quoth the King, "Yes: there came to me a stranger and I
builded the Baths for him, even as I builded the dyery for thee;
and indeed 'tis a mighty fine Hammam and an ornament to my city;"
and he went on to describe to him the virtues of the bath.  Quoth
the dyer, "Hast thou entered therein?"; and quoth the King,
"Yes."  Thereupon cried Abu Kir, "Alhamdolillah-praised be
God,-who save thee from the mischief of yonder villain and foe of
the Faith, I mean the bathkeeper!"  The King enquired, "And what
of him?"; and Abu Kir replied, "Know, O King of the age that, an
thou enter the Hammam again, after this day, thou wilt surely
perish."  "How so?" said the King; and the dyer said, "This
bath-keeper is thy foe and the foe of the Faith, and he induced
thee not to stablish this Bath but because he designed therein to
poison thee.  He hath made fo