 and the quality seems to have been inherited. The
first Háshim got his name from crumbling bread into the Saríd or
brewis of the Meccan pilgrims during "The Ignorance." He was
buried at Ghazzah (Gaza) but his tomb was soon forgotten.

[FN#38] i.e. thy lover.

[FN#39] i.e. of those destined to hell; the especial home of
Moslem suicides.

[FN#40] Arab. "Ummál" (plur. of ‘Ámil) viceroys or governors of
provinces.

[FN#41] A town of Irák Arabi (Mesopotamia) between Baghdad and
Bassorah built upon the Tigris and founded by Al-Hajjaj: it is so
called because the "Middle" or half-way town between Basrah and
Kufah. To this place were applied the famous lines:--

     In good sooth a right noble race are they;
     Whose men "yea" can't say nor their women "nay."

[FN#42] i.e. robed as thou art.

[FN#43] i.e. his kinsfolk of the Hashimis.

[FN#44] See vol. ii. 24. {Vol2, FN#49}

[FN#45] Arab. "Sur'itu" = I was possessed of a Jinn, the common
Eastern explanation of an epileptic fit long before the days of
the Evangel. See vol. iv. 89.

[FN#46] Arab. "Zí'ah," village, feof or farm.

[FN#47] Arab. "Taríkah."

[FN#48] "Most of the great Arab musicians had their own peculiar
fashion of tuning the lute, for the purpose of extending its
register or facilitating the accompaniment of songs composed in
uncommon keys and rhythms or possibly of increasing its sonority,
and it appears to have been a common test of the skill of a great
musician, such as Ishac el-Mausili or his father Ibrahim, to
require him to accompany a difficult song on a lute purposely
untuned. As a (partial) modern instance of the practice referred
to in the text, may be cited Paganini's custom of lowering or
raising the G string of the violin in playing certain of his own
compositions. According to the Kitab el-Aghani, Ishac el-Mausili
is said to have familiarized himself, by incessant practice, with
the exact sounds produced by each division of the strings of the
four course lute of his day, under every imaginable circumstance
of tuning." It is regrettable that Mr. Payne does not give us
more of such notes.

[FN#49] See vol. vii. 363 for the use of these fumigations.

[FN#50] In the Mac. Edit. "Aylah" for Ubullah: the latter is one
of the innumerable canals, leading from Bassorah to Ubullah-town
a distance of twelve miles. Its banks are the favourite pleasure-
resort of the townsfolk, being built over with villas and
pavilions (now no more) and the orchards seem to form one great
garden, all confined by one wall. See Jaubert's translation of
Al-Idrisi, vol. i. pp. 368-69. The Aylah, a tributary of the
Tigris, waters (I have noted) the Gardens of Bassorah.

[FN#51] Music having been forbidden by Mohammed who believed with
the vulgar that the Devil has something to do with it. Even
Paganini could not escape suspicion in the nineteenth century.

[FN#52] The "Mahr," or Arab dowry consists of two parts, one paid
down on consummation and the other agreed to be paid to the wife,
contingently upon her being divorced by her husband. If she
divorce him this portion, which is generally less than the half,
cannot be claimed by her; and I have related the Persian
abomination which compels the woman to sacrifice her rights. See
vol. iii. p. 304.

[FN#53] i.e. the cost of her maintenance during the four months
of single blessedness which must or ought to elapse before she
can legally marry again.

[FN#54] Lane translates most incompletely, "To Him, then, be
praise, first and last!"

[FN#55] Lane omits because it is "extremely puerile" this most
characteristic tale, one of the two oldest in The Nights which Al
Mas'udi mentions as belonging to the Hazár Afsáneh (See Terminal
Essay). Von Hammer (Preface in Trébutien's translation p. xxv )
refers the fables to an Indian (Egyptian ?) origin and remarks,
"sous le rapport de leur antiquité et de la morale qu'ils
renferment, elles méritent la plus grande attention, mais d'un
autre côté elles ne vent rien moins qu'amusantes."

[FN#56] Lane (iii. 579) writes the word "Shemmas": the Bresl.
Edit. (viii. 4) "Shímás." 

[FN#57] i.e. When the tale begins.

[FN#58] Arab. "Khafz al-jináh" drooping the wing as a brooding
bird. In the Koran ([vii. 88) lowering the wing" = demeaning
oneself gently. 

[FN#59] The Bresl. Edit. (viii. 3) writes "Kil'ád": Trébutien
(iii. 1) "le roi Djilia."

[FN#60] As the sequel shows the better title would be, '`The Cat
and the Mouse" as in the headings of the Mac. Edit. and "What
befel the Cat with the Mouse," as a punishment for tyranny. But
all three Edits. read as in the text and I have not cared to
change it. In our European adaptations the mouse becomes a rat.

[FN#61] So that I may not come to grief by thus daring to
foretell evil things.

[FN#62] Arab. "Af'á'" pl. Afá'í = {Greek}, both being derived
from 0. Egypt. Hfi, a worm, snake. Af'á is applied to many
species of the larger ophidia, all supposed to be venomous, and
synonymous with "Sall" (a malignant viper) in Al Mutalammis. See
Preston's Al Hariri, p. 101.

[FN#63] This apparently needless cruelty of all the feline race
is a strong weapon in the hand of the Eastern "Dahrí" who holds
that the world is God and is governed by its own laws, in
opposition to the religionists believing in a Personal Deity
whom, moreover, they style the Merciful, the Compassionate, etc.
Some Christians have opined that cruelty came into the world with
"original Sin," but how do they account for the hideous waste of
life and the fearful destructiveness of the fishes which
certainly never learned anything from man? The mystery of the
cruelty of things can be explained only by a Law without a
Law-giver.

[FN#64] The three things not to be praised before death in
Southern Europe are a horse, a priest and a woman; and it has
become a popular saying that only fools prophesy before the
event.

[FN#65] 'Arab. "Sawn" =butter melted and skimmed. See vol. i.
144.

[FN#66] This is a mere rechauffé of the Barber's tale of his
Fifth Brother (vol. i. 335). In addition to the authorities there
cited I may mention the school reading-lesson in Addison's
Spectator derived from Galland's version of "Alnaschar and his
basket of Glass," the Persian version of the Hitopadesa or
"Anwár-i-Suhayli (Lights of Canopes) by Husayn Vá'iz; the Foolish
Sachali of "Indian Fairy Tales" (Miss Stokes); the allusion in
Rabelais to the fate of the "Shoemaker and his pitcher of milk"
and the "Dialogues of creatures moralised" (1516), whence
probably La Fontaine drew his fable, "La Laitière et le Pot au
lait."

[FN#67] Arab. ' 'Násik," a religious, a man of Allah from Nask,
devotion: somewhat like Sálik (Dabistan iii. 251)

[FN#68] The well-known Egyptian term for a peasant, a husbandman,
extending from the Nile to beyond Mount Atlas

[FN#69] This is again, I note, the slang sense of "'Azím," which
in classical Arabic means

[FN#70] Arab "Adab" ; see vol. i. 132. It also implies mental
discipline, the culture which leads to excellence, good manners
and good morals; and it is sometimes synonymous with literary
skill and scholarship. "Ilm al-Adab," says Haji Khalfah (Lane's
Lex.), " is the science whereby man guards against error in the
language of the Arabs spoken or written." 

[FN#71] i.e. I esteem thee as thou deserves".

[FN#72] The style is intended to be worthy of the statesman. In
my "Mission to Dahome" the reader will find many a similar scene.

[FN#73] The Bresl. Edit. (vol. viii. 22) reads "Turks" or "The
Turk" in lieu of "many peoples."

[FN#74] i.e. the parents.

[FN#75] The humour of this euphuistic Wazirial speech, purposely
made somewhat pompous, is the contrast between the unhappy
Minister's praises and the result of his prognostication. I
cannot refrain from complimenting Mr. Payne upon the admirable
way in which he has attacked and mastered all the difficulties of
its abstruser passages.

[FN#76] 'Arab. "Halummú" plur. of "Halumma"=draw near! The latter
form is used by some tribes for all three numbers; others affect
a dual and a plural (as in the text). Preston ( Al Hariri, p.
210) derives it from Heb., but the geographers of Kufah and
Basrah (who were not etymologists) are divided about its origin.
He translates (p. 221) "Halumma Jarran = being the rest of the
tale in continuation with this, i.e. in accordance with it like
our "and so forth." And in p. 271, he makes Halumma=Hayya i.e.
hither' (to prayer, etc.).

[FN#77] This is precisely the semi-fatalistic and wholly
superstitious address which would find favour with Moslems of the
present day they still prefer "calling upon Hercules" to putting
their shoulders to the wheel. Mr. Redhouse had done good work in
his day but of late he has devoted himself, especially in the
"Mesnevi," to a rapprochement between Al-Islam and Christianity
which both would reject (see supra, vol. vii. p. 135). The
Calvinistic predestination as shown in the term "vessel of
wrath," is but a feeble reflection of Moslem fatalism. On this
subject I shall have more to say in a future volume.

[FN#78] The inhabitants of temperate climates have no idea what
ants can do in the tropics. The Kafirs of South Africa used to
stake down their prisoners (among them a poor friend of mine)
upon an ant-hill and they were eaten atom after atom in a few
hours. The death must be the slowest form of torture; but
probably the nervous system soon becomes insensible. The same has
happened to more than one hapless invalid, helplessly bedridden,
in Western Africa. I have described an invasion of ants in my
"Zanzibar," vol. ii. 169; and have suffered from such attacks in
many places between that and Dahomey.

[FN#79] Arab. "Sa'lab." See vol. iii 132, where it is a fox. I
render it jackal because that cousin of the fox figures as a
carnon-eater in Hindu folk-lore, the Hitopadesa, Panchopakhyan,
etc. This tale, I need hardly say, is a mere translation; as is
shown by the Kathá s.s. "Both jackal and fox are nicknamed Joseph
the Scribe (Tálib Yúsuf) in the same principle that lawyers are
called landsharks by sailors." (P. 65, Moorish Lotus Leaves,
etc., by George D. Cowan and R. L. N. Johnston, London, Tinsleys,
1883.)

[FN#80] Arab. "Sahm mush'ab" not "barbed" (at the wings) but with
double front, much used for birding and at one time familiar in
the West as in the East. And yet "barbed" would make the fable
read much better.

[FN#81] Arab. "la'lla," usually = haply, belike; but used here
and elsewhere = forsure, certainly.

[FN#82] Arab. "Maghrib" (or in full Maghrib al Aksá) lit. =the
Land of the setting sun for whose relation to "Mauritania" see
vol. vii. 220. It is almost synonymous with "Al-Gharb"=the West
whence Portugal borrowed the two Algarves, one being in Southern
Europe and the other over the straits about Tangier Ceuta;
fronting Spanish Trafalgar, i.e. Taraf al Gharb, the edge of the
West. I have noted (Pilgrimage i. 9) the late Captain Peel's
mis-translation "Cape of Laurels" (Al-Ghár).

[FN#83] Even the poorest of Moslem wanderers tries to bear with
him a new suit of clothes for keeping the two festivals and
Friday service in the Mosque. See Pilgrimage i. 235; iii. 257,
etc.

[FN#84] Arab. "Sáyih" lit. a wanderer, subaudi for religious and
ascetic objects; and not to be confounded with the "pilgrim"
proper.

[FN#85] i.e. a Religious, a wandering beggar.

[FN#86] This was the custom of the whole Moslem world and still
is where uncorrupted by Christian uncharity and contempt for all
"men of God" save its own. But the change in such places as Egypt
is complete and irrevocable. Even in 1852 my Dervish's frock
brought me nothing but contempt in Alexandria and Cairo.

[FN#87] Arab. "Ya jáhil," lit. =O ignorant. The popular word is
Ahmak which, however, in the West means a maniac, a madman, a
Santon; "Bohlí" being= a fool.

[FN#88] The prison according to the practice of the East being in
the palace: so the Moorish 'Kasbah," which lodges the Governor
and his guard, always contains the jail.

[FN#89] Arab. "Tuwuffiya," lit.=was received (into the grace of
God), an euphemistic and more polite term than "máta"=he died.
The latter term is avoided by the Founder of Chnstianity; and our
Spiritualists now say "passed away to a higher life," a phrase
embodying a theory which, to say the least, is "not proven "

[FN#90] Arab. "Yá Abá al-Khayr"= our my good lord, sir, fellow,
etc.

[FN#91] Arab. "Háwi" from "Hayyah," a serpent. See vol. iii. 145.
Most of the Egyptian snake charmers are Gypsies, but they do not
like to be told of their origin. At Baroda in Guzerat I took
lessons in snake-catching, but found the sport too dangerous;
when the animal flees, the tail is caught by the left hand and
the right is slipped up to the neck, a delicate process, as a few
inches too far or not far enough would be followed by certain
death in catching a Cobra. At last certain of my messmates killed
one of the captives and the snake-charmer would have no more to
do with me.

[FN#92] Arab. "Sallah," also Pers., a basket of wickerwork. This
article is everywhere used for lodging snakes from Egypt to
Morocco.

[FN#93] Arab. "Mubarak." It is a favourite name for a slave in
Morocco, the slave-girl being called Mubárakah; and the proverb
being, "Blessed is the household which hath neither M'bárk nor
M'bárkah" (as they contract the words).

[FN#94] The Bresl. Edit. (viii. 48) instead of the Gate (Báb)
gives a Bádhanj=a Ventilator; for which latter rendering see vol.
i. 257. The spider's web is Koranic (lxxxi. 40) "Verily frailest
of all houses is the house of the spider."

[FN#95] Prob. from the Persian Wird=a pupil, a disciple.

[FN#96] And yet, as the next page shows the youth's education was
complete in his twelfth year.  But as all three texts agree, I do
not venture upon changing the number to six or seven, the age at
which royal education outside the Harem usually begins.

[FN#97] i.e. One for each day in the Moslem year. For these
object-lessons, somewhat in Kinder-garten style, see the Book of
Sindibad or The Malice of Women (vol. vi. 126).

[FN#98] Arab. "Jahábizah" plur. of "Jahbiz"=acute, intelligent
(from the Pers. Kahbad?)

[FN#99] Arab. "Nimr" in the Bresl. Edit. viii. 58. The Mac. Edit.
suggests that the leopard is the lion's Wazir.

[FN#100] Arab "Kaun" lit. =Being, existence. Trébutien (iii. 20)
has it "Qu'est-ce que l'être (God), I'existence (Creation),
l'être dans['existence (the world), et la duree de l'être dans
l'existence (the other world).

[FN#101] i.e for the purpose of requital. All the above is
orthodox Moslem doctrine, which utterly ignores the dictum "ex
nihilo nihil fit;" and which would look upon Creation by Law
(Darwinism) as opposed to Creation by miracle (e.g. the Mosaic
cosmogony) as rank blasphemy. On the other hand the Eternity of
Matter and its transcendental essence are tenets held by a host
of Gnostics, philosophers and Eastern Agnostics.

[FN#102] This is a Moslem lieu commun; usually man is likened to
one suspended in a bottomless well by a thin rope at which a
rodent is continually gnawing and who amuses himself in licking 
a few drops of honey left by bees on the revetement.

[FN#103] A curious pendent to the Scriptural parable of the
Uniust Steward.

[FN#104] Arab. "Rúh" Heb. Ruach: lit. breath (spiritus) which in
the animal kingdom is the surest sign of life. See vol. v. 29.
Nothing can be more rigidly materialistic than the called Mosaic
law. 

[FN#105] Arab. "Al-Amr" which may also mean the business, the
matter, the affair.

[FN#106] Arab. "Ukáb al-kásir." lit. =the breaker eagle.

[FN#107] Arab "Lijám shadíd:" the ring-bit of the Arabs is
perhaps the severest form known: it is required by the Eastern
practice of pulling up the horse when going at full speed and it
is too well known to require description. As a rule the Arab
rides with a "lady's hand" and the barbarous habit of "hanging on
by the curb" is unknown to him. I never pass by Rotten Row or see
a regiment of English Cavalry without wishing to leave riders
nothing but their snaffles.

[FN#108] We find this orderly distribution of time (which no one
adopts) in many tongues and many forms. In the Life of Sir W.
Jones (vol. i. p. 193, Poetical Works etc.) the following occurs,
"written in India on a small piece of paper";--

                    Sir Edward Coke 
          "Six hours to sleep, in law's grave study six! 
          Four spend in prayer,--the rest on Heaven fix!" 
                    Rather:
          "Seven hours to law, to soothing slumber seven; 
          Ten to the world allot, and all to Heaven!" 

But this is not practical. I must prefer the Chartist
distribution:

          Six hours sleep and six hours play: 
          Six hours work and six shillings a day.

Mr Froude (Oceana) speaks of New Zealanders having attained that
ideal of operative felicity:--

          Eight to work, eight to play; 
          Eight to sleep and eight shillings a day.

[FN#109] Arab. "Bahímah," mostly=black cattle: see vol. iv. 54.

[FN#110] As a rule when the felidæ wag their tails, it is a sign
of coming anger, the reverse with the canidæ.

[FN#111] In India it is popularly said that the Rajah can do
anything with the Ryots provided he respects their women and
their religion--not their property.

[FN#112] Arab. "Sunan" for which see vol. v. 36, 167. Here it
is=Rasm or usage, equivalent to our precedents, and held valid,
especially when dating from olden time, in all matters which are
not expressly provided for by Koranic command. For instance a
Hindí Moslem (who doubtless borrowed the customs from Hindús)
will refuse to eat with the Kafir, and when the latter objects
that there is no such prohibition in the Koran will reply, "No
but it is our Rasm." As a rule the Anglo-Indian is very ignorant
on this essential point.

[FN#113] Lit. "lowering the wings," see supra p. 33.

[FN#114] .i.e. friends  and acquaintances.

[FN#115] Arab. "Hamídah"=praiseworthy or satisfactory.

[FN#116] Not only alluding to the sperm of man and beast, but
also to the "Neptunist" doctrine held by the ancient Greeks and
Hindus and developed in Europe during the last century.

[FN#117] Arab. "Taksím" dividing into parts, analysis.

[FN#118] this is the usual illogical contention of all religions.
It is not the question whether an Almighty Being can do a given
thing: the question is whether He has or has not done it.

[FN#119] Upon the old simile of the potter I shall have something
to say in a coming volume.

[FN#120] A fine specimen of a peculiarity in the undeveloped mind
of man, the universal confusion between things objective as a
dead body and states of things as death. We begin by giving a
name, for facility of intercourse, to phases, phenomena and
conditions of matter; and, having created the word we proceed to
supply it with a fanciful entity, e.g. "The Mind (a useful term
to express the aggregate action of the brain, nervous system
etc.) of man is immortal." The next step is personification as
Time with his forelock, Death with his skull and Night (the
absence of light) with her starry mantle. For poetry this abuse
of language is a sine qua non, but it is deadly foe to all true
philosophy.

[FN#121] Christians would naturally understand this "One Word" to
be the {Greek} of the Platonists, adopted by St. John
(comparatively a late writer) and by the Alexandrian school,
Jewish (as Philo Judaeus) and Christian. But here the tale-teller
alludes to the Divine Word "Kun" (be!) whereby the worlds came
into existence.

[FN#122] Arab. "Ya bunayyí" a dim. form lit. "O my little son !"
an affectionate address frequent in Russian, whose "little
father" (under "Bog") is his Czar.

[FN#123] Thus in two texts. Mr. Payne has, "Verily God the Most
High created man after His own image, and likened him to Himself,
all of Him truth, without falsehood; then He gave him dominion
over himself and ordered him and forbade him, and it was man who
transgressed His commandment and erred in his obedience and
brought falsehood upon himself of his own will." Here he borrows
from the Bresl. Edit. viii. 84 (five first lines). But the
doctrine is rather Jewish and Christian than Moslem: Al-Mas'údi
(ii. 389) introduces a Copt in the presence of Ibn Tutún saying,
"Prince, these people (designing a Jew) pretend that Allah
Almighty created Adam (i.e. mankind) after His own image" ('Alá
Súrati-h).

[FN#124] Arab. "Istitá'ah"=ableness e.g. "Al hajj 'inda
'l-Istitá'ah"=Pilgrimage when a man is able thereto (by easy
circumstances).

[FN#125] Arab. "Al-Kasab," which phrenologists would translate
"acquisitiveness," The author is here attempting to reconcile
man's moral responsibility, that is Freewill, with Fate by which
all human actions are directed and controlled. I cannot see that
he fails to "apprehend the knotty point of doctrine involved";
but I find his inability to make two contraries agree as
pronounced as that of all others, Moslems and Christians, that
preceded him in the same path.

[FN#126] The order should be, "men, angels and Jinn," for which
see vol. i. p. 10. But "angels" here takes precedence because
Iblis was one of them.

[FN#127] Arab. "Wartah"=precipice, quagmire, quicksand and hence
sundry secondary and metaphorical significations, under which, as
in the "Semitic" (Arabic) tongues generally, the prosaical and
material sense of the word is clearly evident. I noted this in
Pilgrimage iii. 66 and was soundly abused for so saying by a host
of Sciolists.

[FN#128] i.e. Allowing the Devil to go about the world and seduce
mankind until Doomsday when "auld Sootie's" occupation will be
gone.  Surely "Providence" might have managed better.

[FN#129] i.e. to those who deserve His love.

[FN#130] Here "Istitá'ah" would mean capability of action, i.e.
freewill, which is a mere word like "free-trade."

[FN#131] Arab. "Bi al-taubah" which may also mean "for (on
account of his) penitence."  The reader will note how the learned
Shimas "dodges" the real question.  He is asked why the
"Omnipotent, Omniscient did not prevent (i.e. why He created)
sin?" He answers that He kindly permitted (i.e. created and
sanctioned) it that man might repent.  Proh pudor! If any one
thus reasoned of mundane matters he would be looked upon as the
merest fool.

[FN#132] Arab. "Mahall al-Zauk," lit.=seat of taste.

[FN#133] Mr. Payne translates "it" i.e. the Truth; but the
formula following the word shows that Allah is meant.

[FN#134] Moslems, who do their best to countermine the ascetic
idea inherent in Christianity, are not ashamed of the sensual
appetite; but rather the reverse. I have heard in Persia of a
Religious, highly esteemed for learning and saintly life who,
when lodged by a disciple at Shiraz, came out of his sleeping
room and aroused his host with the words "Shahwat dáram!"
equivalent to our "I want a woman." He was at once married to one
of the slave-girls and able to gratify the demands of the flesh.

[FN#135] Koran iv. 81, "Whatever good betideth thee is from God,
and whatever betideth thee Of evil is from thyself": rank
Manichæism, as pronounced as any in Christendom.

[FN#136] Arab. "Zukhruf" which Mr. Payne picturesquely renders
"painted gawds."

[FN#137] It is the innate craving in the "Aryan" (Iranian, not
the Turanian) mind, this longing to know what follows Death, or
if nothing follows it, which accounts for the marvellous
diffusion of the so-called Spiritualism which is only
Swedenborgianism systematised and earned out into action, amongst
nervous and impressionable races like the Anglo-American. In
England it is the reverse; the obtuse sensitiveness of a people
bred on beef and beer has made the "Religion of the Nineteenth
Century" a manner of harmless magic, whose miracles are
table-turning and ghost seeing whilst the prodigious rascality of
its prophets (the so-called Mediums) has brought it into
universal disrepute. It has been said that Catholicism must be
true to co-exist with the priest and it is the same with
Spiritualism proper, by which I understand the belief in a life
beyond the grave, a mere continuation of this life; it flourishes
(despite the Medium) chiefly because it has laid before man the
only possible and intelligible idea of a future state.

[FN#138] See vol. vi. p. 7. The only lie which degrades a man in
his own estimation and in that of others, is that told for fear
of telling the truth. Au reste, human society and civilised
intercourse are built upon a system of conventional lying. and
many droll stories illustrate the consequences of disregarding
the dictum, la verité n'est pas tonjours bonne à dire.

[FN#139] Arab. "Walí'ahd" which may mean heir-presumptive (whose
heirship is contingent) or heir-apparent.

[FN#140] Arab. "Yá abati"= my papa (which here would sound
absurd).

[FN#141] All the texts give a decalogue; but Mr. Payne has
reduced it to a heptalogue.

[FN#142] The Arabs who had a variety of anæsthetics never seem to
have studied the subject of "euthanasia." They preferred seeing a
man expire in horrible agonies to relieving him by means of
soporifics and other drugs: so I have heard Christians exult in
saying that the sufferer "kept his senses to the last." Of course
superstition is at the bottom of this barbarity; the same which a
generation ago made the silly accoucheur refuse to give ether
because of the divine (?) saying "In sorrow shalt thou bring
forth children." (Gen iii. 16.) In the Bosnia-Herzegovina
campaign many of the Austrian officers carried with them doses of
poison to be used in case of being taken prisoners by the
ferocious savages against whom they were fighting. As many
anecdotes about "Easing off the poor dear" testify, the
Euthanasia-system is by no means unknown to the lower classes in
England. I shall have more to say on this subject.

[FN#143] See vol. iii. p. 253 for the consequences of royal
seclusion of which Europe in the present day can contribute
examples. The lesson which it teaches simply is that the world
can get on very well without royalties.

[FN#144] The grim Arab humour in the text is the sudden change
for the worse of the good young man. Easterns do not believe in
the Western saw, "Nemo repente fuit turpissimus." The spirited
conduct of the subjects finds many parallels in European history,
especially in Portugal: see my Life of Camoens p. 234.

[FN#145] Arab. "Muhárabah" lit.=doing battle; but is sometimes
used in the sense of gain-saying or disobeying.

[FN#146] Arab. "Duwámah" (from "duwám"=vertigo, giddiness) also
applied to a boy's whip ton.

[FN#147] Arab. "Khayr o (we) Áfiyah," a popular phrase much used
in salutations, &c.

[FN#148] Another instance, and true to life, of the democracy of
despotism in which the express and combined will of the people is
the only absolute law. Hence Russian autocracy is forced into
repeated wars for the possession of Constantinople which, in the
present condition of the Empire, would be an unmitigated evil to
her and would be only too glad to see a Principality of Byzantium
placed under the united protection of the European Powers. I have
treated of this in my paper on the "Partition of Turkey," which
first appeared, headed the "Future of Turkey," in the Daily
Telegraph, of March 7, 1880, and subsequently by its own name in
the Manchester Examiner, January 3, 1881. The main reason why the
project is not carried out appears to be that the "politicals"
would thereby find their occupation gone and they naturally
object to losing so fine a field of action. So Turkey still plays
the rôle of the pretty young lady being courted by a rabble of
valets.

[FN#149] Good Moslems are bound to abate such scandals; and in a
case of the kind even neighbours are expected to complain before
the Chief of Police. This practice forms "Viligance Committees"
all over the Mahommedan East: and we may take a leaf out of their
books if dynamite-outrages continue.

[FN#150] But a Hadis, attributed to Mohammed, says, "The Prince
of a people is their servant." See Matth. xx. 26-27.

[FN#151] Easterns are well aware of the value of this drug which
has become the base of so many of our modern medicines.

[FN#152] The strangest poison is mentioned by Sonnini who, as a
rule, is a trustworthy writer. Noticing the malignity of Egyptian
women he declares (p. 628, English trans.) that they prepare a
draught containing a quant. suff. of menstruous discharge at
certain phases of the moon, which produces symptoms of scurvy;
the gums decay, the teeth, beard and hair fall off, the body
dries, the limbs lose strength and death follows within a year.
He also asserts that no counterpoison is known and if this be
true he confers a boon upon the Locustæ and Brinvilliers of
modern Europe. In Morocco "Ta'am" is the vulgar name for a
mixture of dead men's bones, eyes, hair and similar ingredients
made by old wives and supposed to cause a wasting disease for
which the pharmacopoeia has no cure. Dogs are killed by needles
cunningly inserted into meat-balls; and this process is known
through out the Moslem world.

[FN#153] Which contained the Palace. 

[FN#154] Arab. "Lá baas." See Night vol. iv. 164.

[FN#155] For Ta'lab (Sa'lab) see supra, p. 48. In Morocco it is
undoubtedly the red or common fox which, however, is not
gregarious as in the text.

[FN#156] See vol. iii. 146.

[FN#157] Arab. "Muunah" which in Morocco applies to the
provisions furnished gratis by the unfortunate village-people to
travellers who have a passport from the Sultan. its root is Maun
=supplying necessaries. "The name is supposed to have its origin
in that of Manna the miraculous provision bestowed by the bounty
of Heaven on the Israelites while wandering in the deserts of
Arabia." Such is the marvellous information we find in p. 40,
"Morocco and the Moors" by John Drummond Hay (Murray, 1861)

[FN#158] i.e. He resolved to do them justice and win a reward
from  Heaven.

[FN#159] Arab. ''Luss" = thief, robber, rogue, rascal, the
Persian "Luti" of popular usage. This is one of the many
''Simpleton stories" in which Eastern folk-lore abounds. I hear
that Mr. Clouston is preparing a collection, and look forward to
it with interest.

[FN#160] Arab. "Tibn" for which see vol. i 16.

[FN#161] A fanciful origin of "Díván" (here an audience-chamber)
which may mean demons (plural of Dív) is attributed to a King of
Persia. He gave a series of difficult documents and accounts to
his scribes and surprised at the quickness and cleverness with
which they were ordered exclaimed, "These men be Divs!" Hence a
host of secondary meanings as a book of Odes with distichs rhymed
in alphabetical order and so forth.

[FN#162] In both cases the word "Jabábirah" is used, the plur. of
Jabbár, the potent, especially applied to the Kings of the
Canaanites and giants like the mythical Og of Bashan. So the Heb.
Jabbúrah is a title of the Queens of Judah.

[FN#163] Arab. "Kitáb al-Kazá"= the Book of Judgments, such as
the Kazi would use when deciding cases in dispute, by legal
precedents and the Rasm or custom of the country.

[FN#164] i.e. sit before the King as referee, etc.

[FN#165] This massacre of refractory chiefs is one of the grand
moyens of Eastern state-craft, and it is almost always successful
because circumstances require it; popular opinion approves of it
and it is planned and carried out with discretion and secrecy.
The two familiar instances in our century are the massacre of the
Mamelukes by Mohammed Ali Pasha the Great and of the turbulent
chiefs of the Omani Arabs by our ancient ally Sayyid Sa'íd,
miscalled the "Imám of Maskat."

[FN#166] The metaphor (Sabaka) is from horse-racing, the Arabs
being, I have said, a horsey people.

[FN#167] Arab. "Kurdús" = A body of horse.

[FN#168] Arab. "Ibn 'Irs." See vol. iii. 147.

[FN#169] Arab. "Al Hind-al-Aksá." The Sanskrit Sindhu (lands on
the Indus River) became in Zend "Hendu" and hence in Arabic Sind
and Hind, which latter I wish we had preserved instead of the
classical "India" or the poetical "Ind."

[FN#170] i.e. by geomancy: see vol. iii. 269 for a note on
Al-Raml. The passage is not in the Mac. Edit.

[FN#171] This address gave the boy Wazirial rank. In many parts
of Europe, England included, if the Sovereign address a subject
with a title not belonging to him, it is a disputed point if the
latter can or cannot claim it.

[FN#172] Koran, chapter of Joseph xii. 28, spoken by Potiphar
after Joseph's innocence had been proved by a witness in
Potiphar's house or according to the Talmud (Sepher Hádjascher)
by an infant in the cradle. The texts should have printed this as
a quotation (with vowel points).

[FN#173] Arab. "Al-'Azíz," alluding to Joseph the Patriarch
entitled in Egypt "Azíz al-Misr"= Magnifico of Misraim (Koran
xii. 54). It is generally believed that Ismail Pasha, whose
unwise deposition has caused the English Government such a host
of troubles and load of obloquy, aspired to be named "'Azíz" by
the Porte; but was compelled to be satisfied with Khadív (vulg.
written Khedive, and pronounced even "Kédivé"), a Persian title,
which simply means prince or Rajah, as Khadív-i-Hind.

[FN#174] i.e. The Throne room.

[FN#175] For the "Dawát" or wooden inkcase containing reeds see
vol. v. 239 and viii. 178. I may remark that its origin is the
Egyptian "Pes," of which there is a specimen in the British
Museum inscribed, "Amásis the good god and Lord of the two
Lands."

[FN#176] i.e. I am governed by the fear of Allah in my dealings
to thee and thy subjects.

[FN#177] Arabic has no single word for million although the
Maroccans have adopted "Milyún" from the Spaniards (see p. 100 of
the Rudimentos del Árabe vulgar que se habla en el imperio de
Marruccos por El P. Fr. Josè de Lerchundi, Madrid 1872): This
lack of the higher numerals, the reverse of the Hindu languages,
makes Arabic "arithmology" very primitive and almost as cumbrous
as the Chinese.

[FN#178] i.e. I am thy slave to slay or to pardon.

[FN#179] Arab. ''Matta'aka 'llah''=Allah permit thee to enjoy,
from the root mate', whence cometh the Maroccan Matá'i=my, mine,
which answers to Bitá'i in Egypt.

[FN#180] Arab. "Khitáb" = the exordium of a letter preceding its
business-matter and in which the writer displays all his art. It
ends with "Ammá ba'd," lit.=but after, equivalent to our "To
proceed." This "Khitáb" is mostly skipped over by modern
statesmen who will say, "Now after the nonsense let us come to
the sense"; but their secretaries carefully weigh every word of
it, and strongly resent all shortcomings.

[FN#181] Strongly suggesting that the King had forgotten how to
read and write. So not a few of the Amirs of Sind were
analphabetic and seemed rather proud of it: "a Baloch cannot
write, but he always carries a signet-ring." I heard of an old
English lady of the past generation in Northern Africa who openly
declared "A Warrington shall never learn to read or write."

[FN#182] Arab. "Ámin," of which the Heb. form is Amen from the
root Amn=stability, constancy. In both tongues it is a particle
of affirmation or consent=it is true! So be it! The Hebrew has
also "Amanah"=verily, truly.

[FN#183] To us this seems a case of "hard lines" for the unhappy
women; but Easterns then believed and still believe in the
divinity which cloth hedge in a King, in his reigning by the
"grace of God," and in his being the Viceregent of Allah upon
earth; briefly in the old faith of loyalty which great and
successful republics are fast making obsolete in the West and
nowhere faster than in England.

[FN#184] Abú Sír is a manifest corruption of the old Egyptian
Pousiri, the Busiris of our classics, and it gives a name to
sundry villages in modern Egypt where it is usually pronounced
"Búsír".  Abú Kír lit. = the Father of Pitch, is also corrupted
to Abou Kir (Bay); and the townlet now marks the site of jolly
old Canopus, the Chosen Land of Egyptian debauchery.

[FN#185] It is interesting to note the superior gusto with which
the Eastern, as well as the Western tale-teller describes his
scoundrels and villains whilst his good men and women are mostly
colourless and unpicturesque.  So Satan is the true hero of
Paradise-Lost and by his side God and man are very ordinary; and
Mephistopheles is much better society than Faust and Margaret.

[FN#186] Arab.  "Dukhán," lit. = smoke, here tobacco for the
Chibouk, "Timbák" or "Tumbák" being the stronger (Persian and
other) variety which must be washed before smoking in the Shíshah
or water pipe.  Tobacco is mentioned here only and is evidently
inserted by some scribe: the "weed" was not introduced into the
East before the end of the sixteenth century (about a hundred
years after coffee), when it radically changed the manners of
society.

[FN#187] Which meant that the serjeant, after the manner of such
officials, would make him pay dearly before giving up the key. 
Hence a very severe punishment in the East is to "call in a
policeman" who carefully fleeces all those who do not bribe him
to leave them in freedom.

[FN#188] Arab. "Má Dáhiyatak?" lit. "What is thy misfortune?" 
The phrase is slighting if not insulting.

[FN#189] Amongst Moslems the plea of robbing to keep life and
body together would be accepted by a good man like Abu Sir, who
still consorted with a self-confessed thief.

[FN#190] To make their agreement religiously binding.  See vol.
iv. 36.

[FN#191] Arab. "Ghaliyún"; many of our names for craft seem
connected with Arabic: I have already noted "Carrack" = harrák:
to which add Uskuf in Marocco pronounced 'Skuff = skiff; Katírah
= a cutter; Bárijah = a barge; etc. etc.

[FN#192] The patient is usually lathered in a gib gasin of tinned
brass, "Mambrino's helmet" with a break in the rim to fit the
throat; but the poorer classes carry only a small cup with water
instead of soap and water ignoring the Italian proverb, "Barba
ben saponata mezza fatta" = well lathered is half shaved.  A
napkin fringed at either end is usually thrown over the Figaro's
shoulder and used to wipe the razor.

[FN#193] Arab. "Nusf." See vol. ii. 37.

[FN#194] Arab. "Batárikh" the roe (sperm or spawn) of the salted
Fasíkh (fish) and the Búrí (mugil cephalus) a salt-water fish
caught in the Nile and considered fair eating. Some write
Butárghá from the old Egyptian town Burát, now a ruin between
Tinnis and Damietta (Sonnini).

[FN#195] Arab. "Kaptán," see vol. iv. 85.

[FN#196] Arab.  "Anyáb," plur. of Náb applied to the grinder
teeth but mostly to the canines or eye teeth, tusks of animals,
etc. (See vol. vii. p. 339) opp. To Saniyah, one of the four
central incisors, a camel in the sixth year and horse, cow, sheep
and goat in fourth year.

[FN#197] The coffee (see also vol. viii. 274) like the tobacco is
probably due to the scribe; but the tale appears to be
comparatively modern.  In The Nights men eat, drink and wash
their hands but do not smoke and sip coffee like the moderns. 
See my Terminal Essay §2.

[FN#198] Arab.  "Mi'lakah" (Bresl. Edit. x, 456).  The fork is
modern even in the East and the Moors borrow their term for it
from fourchette.  But the spoon, which may have begun with a
cockle-shell, dates from the remotest antiquity.

[FN#199] Arab.  "Sufrah" properly the cloth or leather upon which
food is placed.  See vol. i. 178.

[FN#200] i.e. gaining much one day and little another.

[FN#201] Lit. "Rest thyself" i.e. by changing posture.

[FN#202] Arab. "Unnábi" = between dark yellow and red.

[FN#203] Arab.  "Nílah" lit. = indigo, but here applied to all
the materials for dyeing.  The word is Sanskrit, and the growth
probably came from India, although during the Crusaders'
occupation of Jerusalem it was cultivated in the valley of the
lower Jordan.  I need hardly say that it has nothing to do with
the word "Nile" whose origin is still sub judice.  And yet I
lately met a sciolist who pompously announced to me this
philological absurdity as a discovery of his own.

[FN#204] Still a popular form of "bilking" in the Wakálahs or
Caravanserais of Cairo: but as a rule the Bawwáb (porter or
doorkeeper) keeps a sharp eye on those he suspects.  The evil is
increased when women are admitted into these places; so
periodical orders for their exclusion are given to the police.

[FN#205] Natives of Egypt always hold this diaphoresis a sign
that the disease has abated and they regard it rightly in the
case of bilious remittents to which they are subject, especially
after the hardships and sufferings of a sea-voyage with its
alternations of fasting and over-eating.

[FN#206] Not simply, "such and such events happened to him"
(Lane); but, "a curious chance befel him."

[FN#207] Arab. "Harámi," lit. = one who lives on unlawful gains;
popularly a thief.

[FN#208] i.e. he turned on the water, hot and cold.

[FN#209] Men are often seen doing this in the Hammam.  The idea
is that the skin when free from sebaceous exudation sounds louder
under the clapping.  Easterns judge much by the state of the
perspiration, especially in horse-training, which consists of
hand-gallops for many successive miles.  The sweat must not taste
over salt and when held between thumb and forefinger and the two
are drawn apart must not adhere in filaments.

[FN#210] Lit. "Aloes for making Nadd;" see vol. i. 310. 
"Eagle-wood" (the Malay Aigla and Agallochum the Sansk. Agura)
gave rise to many corruptions as lignum aloes, the Portuguese Páo
d' Aguila etc.  "Calamba" or "Calambak" was the finest kind.  See
Colonel Yule in the "Voyage of Linschoten" (vol. i. 120 and 150). 
Edited for the Hakluyt Soc. (1885) by my learned and most amiable
friend, the late Arthur Cooke Burnell.

[FN#211] The Hammam is one of those unpleasant things which are
left "Alà júdi-k" = to thy generosity; and the higher the
bather's rank the more he or she is expected to pay.  See
Pilgrimage i. 103.  In 1853 I paid at Cairo 3 piastres and twenty
paras, something more than sixpence, but now five shillings would
be asked.

[FN#212] This is something like the mythical duchess in England
who could not believe that the poor were starving when
sponge-cakes were so cheap.

[FN#213] This magnificent "Bakhshish" must bring water into the
mouths of all the bath-men in the coffee-house assembly.

[FN#214] i.e. the treasurer did not, as is the custom of such
gentry, demand and receive a large "Bakhshish" on the occasion. 

[FN#215] A fair specimen of clever Fellah chaff.

[FN#216] In the first room of the Hammam, called the Maslakh or
stripping-place, the keeper sits by a large chest in which he
deposits the purses and valuables of his customers and also makes
it the caisse for the pay.  Something of the kind is now done in
the absurdly called "Turkish Baths" of London.

[FN#217] This is the rule in Egypt and Syria and a clout hung
over the door shows that women are bathing.  I have heard, but
only heard, that in times and places when eunuchs went in with
the women youths managed by long practice to retract the
testicles so as to pass for castratos.  It is hard to say what
perseverance may not effect in this line; witness Orsini and his
abnormal development of hearing, by exercising muscles which are
usually left idle.

[FN#218] This reference to Allah shows that Abu Sir did not
believe his dyer-friend.

[FN#219] Arab. "Dawá" (lit. remedy, medicine) the vulgar term:
see vol. iv. 256: also called Rasmah, Núrah and many other names.

[FN#220] Arab. "Má Kahara-ní" = or none hath overcome me. 

[FN#221] Bresl. Edit. "The King of Isbániya." For the "Ishbán"
(Spaniards) an ancient people descended from Japhet son of Noah
and who now are no more, see Al-Mas'udi (Fr. Transl. I. 361). The
"Herodotus of the Arabs" recognises only the "Jalálikah" or
Gallicians, thus bearing witness to the antiquity and importance
of the Gallego race.

[FN#222] Arab. "Sha'r," properly, hair of body, pile, especially
the pecten. See Bruckhardt (Prov. No. 202), "grieving for lack of
a cow she made a whip of her bush," said of those who console
themselves by building Castles in Spain. The "parts below the
waist" is the decent Turkish term for the privities.

[FN#223] The drowning is a martyr's death, the burning is a
foretaste of Hell-fire.

[FN#224] Meaning that if the trick had been discovered the
Captain would have taken the barber's place. We have seen (vol.
i. 63) the Prime Minister superintending the royal kitchen and
here the Admiral fishes for the King's table. It is even more
naïve than the Court of Alcinous.

[FN#225] Bresl. Edit. xi. 32: i.e. save me from disgrace.

[FN#226] Arab. "Khinsir" or "Khinsar," the little finger or the
middle finger. In Arabic each has its own name or names which is
also that of the corresponding toe, e.g. Ibhám (thumb); Sabbábah,
Musabbah or Da'áah (fore-finger); Wastá (medius); Binsir
(annularis ring-finger) and Khinsar (minimus). There are also
names for the several spaces between the fingers. See the English
Arabic Dictionary (London, Kegan Paul an Co., 1881) by the Revd.
Dr. Badger, a work of immense labour and research but which I
fear has been so the learned author a labour of love not of
profit.

[FN#227] Meaning of course that the King signed towards the sack
in which he supposed the victim to be, but the ring fell off
before it could take effect. The Eastern story-teller often
balances his multiplicity of words and needless details by a
conciseness and an elliptical style which make his meaning a
matter of divination.

[FN#228] See vol. v. 111.

[FN#229] This couplet was quoted to me by my friend the Rev. Dr.
Badger when he heard that I was translating "The Nights":
needless to say that it is utterly inappropriate.

[FN#230] For a similar figure see vol i. 25.

[FN#231] Arab. "Hanzal": see vol. v. 19.

[FN#232]  The tale begins upon the model of "Júdar and his
Brethren," vi. 213.  Its hero's full name is Abdu'lláhi=Slave of
Allah, which vulgar Egyptians pronounce Abdallah and purer
speakers, Badawin and others, Abdullah: either form is therefore
admissible.  It is more common among Moslems but not unknown to
Christians especially Syrians who borrow it from the Syriac
Alloh.  Mohammed is said to have said, "The names most approved
by Allah are Abdu'llah, Abd al-Rahmán (Slave of the
Compassionate) and such like" (Pilgrimage i. 20).

[FN#233]  Arab. "Sírah" here probably used of the Nile-sprat
(Clupea Sprattus Linn.) or Sardine of which Forsk says, "Sardinn
in Al-Yaman is applied to a Red Sea fish of the same name." 
Hasselquist the Swede notes that Egyptians stuff the Sardine with
marjoram and eat it fried even when half putrid.

[FN#234]  i.e. by declaring in the Koran (lxvii. 14; lxxiv. 39;
lxxviii. 69; lxxxviii. 17), that each creature hath its appointed
term and lot; especially "Thinketh man that he shall be left
uncared for?" (xl. 36).

[FN#235]  Arab. "Nusf," see vol. ii. 37.

[FN#236]  Arab. "Allah Karim" (which Turks pronounce Kyerím) a
consecrated formula used especially when a man would show himself
resigned to "small mercies."  The fisherman's wife was evidently
pious as she was poor; and the description of the pauper
household is simple and effective.

[FN#237]  This is repeated in the Mac. Edit. pp. 496-97; an
instance amongst many of most careless editing.

[FN#238]  Arab. "Alà mahlak" (vulg.), a popular phrase, often
corresponding with our "Take it coolly."

[FN#239]  For "He did not keep him waiting, as he did the rest of
the folk."  Lane prefers "nor neglected him as men generally
would have done."  But we are told supra that the baker "paid no
heed to the folk by reason of the dense crowd."

[FN#240]  Arab. "Ruh!" the most abrupt form, whose sound is
coarse and offensive as the Turkish yell, "Gyel!"=come here.

[FN#241]  Bresl. Edit. xi. 50-51.

[FN#242]  Arab. "Ádami"=an Adamite, one descended from the
mythical and typical Adam for whom see Philo Judæus.  We are told
in one place a few lines further on that the merman is of
humankind; and in another that he is a kind of fish (Night
dccccxlv).  This belief in mermen, possible originating with the
caricatures of the human face in the intelligent seal and stupid
manatee, is universal.  Al-Kazwini declares that a waterman with
a tail was dried and exhibited, and that in Syria one of them was
married to a woman and had by her a son "who understood the
languages of both his parents."  The fable was refined to perfect
beauty by the Greeks: the mer-folk of the Arabs, Hindus and
Northerners (Scandinavians, etc) are mere grotesques with green
hair, etc.  Art in its highest expression never left the shores
of the Mediterranean, and there is no sign that it ever will.

[FN#243]  Here Lane translates "Wajh" lit. "the desire of seeing
the face of God," and explains in a note that a "Muslim holds
this to be the greatest happiness that can be enjoyed in
Paradise."  But I have noted that the tenet of seeing the
countenance of the Creator, except by the eyes of spirit, is a
much disputed point amongst Moslems.

[FN#244]  Artful enough is this contrast between the squalid
condition of the starving fisherman and the gorgeous belongings
of the Merman.

[FN#245]  Lit. "Verily he laughed at me so that I set him free."
This is a fair specimen of obscure conciseness.

[FN#246]  Arab. "Mishannah," which Lane and Payne translate
basket: I have always heard it used of an old gunny-bag or bag of
plaited palm-leaves.

[FN#247]  Arab. "Kaff Shurayk" applied to a single bun.  The
Shurayk is a bun, an oblong cake about the size of a man's hand
(hence the term "Kaff"=palm) with two long cuts and sundry
oblique crosscuts, made of leavened dough, glazed with egg and
Samn (clarified butter) and flavoured with spices (cinnamon,
curcuma, artemisia and prunes mahalab) and with aromatic seeds,
(Rihat al-'ajin) of which Lane (iii. 641) specifies aniseed,
nigella, absinthium, (Artemisia arborescens) and Káfúrah (A.
camphorata Monspeliensis) etc.  The Shurayk is given to the poor
when visiting the tombs and on certain fêtes.

[FN#248]  "Mother of Prosperities."

[FN#249]  Tribes of pre-historic Arabs who were sent to Hell for
bad behaviour to Prophets Sálih and Húd.  See vol. iii. 294.

[FN#250]  "Too much for him to come by lawfully."

[FN#251]  To protect it.  The Arab. is "Jáh"=high station,
dignity.

[FN#252]  The European reader, especially feminine, will think
this a hard fate for the pious first wife but the idea would not
occur to the Moslem mind.  After bearing ten children a woman
becomes "Umm al-banáti w'al-banín"=a mother of daughters and
sons, and should hold herself unfit for love-disport.  The seven
ages of womankind are thus described by the Arabs and I translate
the lines after a well-known (Irish) model:--

          From ten years to twenty--
          Of beauty there's plenty.
          From twenty to thirty--
          Fat, fair and alert t'ye.
          From thirty to forty--
          Lads and lasses she bore t'ye.
          From forty to fifty--
          An old'un and shifty.
          From fifty to sixty--
          A sorrow that sticks t'ye.
          From sixty to seventy--
          A curse of God sent t'ye.

For these and other sentiments upon the subject of women and
marriage see Pilgrimage ii. 285-87.

[FN#253]  Abdullah, as has been said, means "servant or rather
slave of Allah."

[FN#254]  Again the "Come to my arms, my slight acquaintance," of
the Anti-Jacobin.

[FN#255]  Arab. "Nukl," e.g. the quatre mendicants as opposed to
"Fákihah"=fresh fruit.  The Persians, a people who delight in
gross practical jokes, get the confectioner to coat with sugar
the droppings of sheep and goats and hand them to the bulk of the
party.  This pleasant confection is called "Nukl-i-peshkil"--
dung-dragées.

[FN#256]  The older name of Madínat al-Nabi, the city of the
Prophet; vulg. called Al-Medinah per excellentiam.  See vol. iv.
114.  In the Mac. and Bul. texts we have "Tayyibah"=the goodly,
one of the many titles of that Holy City: see Pilgrimage ii. 119.

[FN#257]  Not "visiting the tomb of," etc. but visiting the
Prophet himself, who is said to have declared that "Ziyárah"
(visitation) of his tomb was in religion the equivalent of a
personal call upon himself.

[FN#258]  Arab. "Nafakah"; for its conditions see Pigrimage iii.
224. I have again and again insisted upon the Anglo-Indian
Government enforcing the regulations of the Faith upon pauper
Hindi pilgrims who go to the Moslem Holy Land as beggars and die
of hunger in the streets. To an "Empire of Opinion" this is an
unmitigated evil (Pilgrimage iii. 256); and now, after some
thirty-four years, there are signs t