hat the suggestions of common
sense are to be adopted.  England has heard of the extraordinary
recklessness and inconsequence of the British-Indian "fellow-
subject."

[FN#259]  The Ka'abah of Meccah.

[FN#260]  When Moslems apply "Nabí!" to Mohammed it is in the
peculiar sense of "prophet" ({Greek})=one who speaks before the
people, not one who predicts, as such foresight was adjured by
the Apostle. Dr. A. Neubauer (The Athenæum No. 3031) finds the
root of "Nabí!" in the Assyrian Nabu and Heb. Noob (occurring in
Exod. vii. 1. "Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet." i.e.
orator, speaker before the people), and holds it to be a
Canaanite term which supplanted "Roeh" (the Seer) e.g. 1 Samuel
ix. 9.  The learned Hebraist traces the cult of Nebo, a secondary
deity in Assyria to Palestine and Phœnicia, Palmyra, Edessa (in
the Nebok of Abgar) and Hierapolis in Syria or Mabug (Nabog?).

[FN#261]  I cannot find "Dandán" even in Lib. Quintus de
Aquaticis Animalibus of the learned Sam. Bochart's "Hierozoïcon"
(London, 1663) and must conjecture that as "Dandán" in Persian
means a tooth (vol. ii. 83) the writer applied it to a sun-fish
or some such well-fanged monster of the deep.

[FN#262] A favourite proverb with the Fellah, when he alludes to
the Pasha and to himself.

[FN#263]  An euphemistic answer, unbernfen as the Germans say.

[FN#264]  It is a temptation to derive this word from bœuf à
l'eau, but I fear that the theory will not hold water.  The
"buffaloes" of Alexandria laughted it to scorn.

[FN#265]  Here the writer's zoological knowledge is at fault. 
Animals, which never or very rarely see man, have no fear of him
whatever.  This is well-known to those who visit the Gull-fairs
at Ascension Island, Santos and many other isolated rocks; the
hen birds will peck at the intruder's ankles but they do not rise
from off their eggs.  For details concerning the "Gull-fair" of
the Summer Islands consult p. 4 "The History of the Bermudas,"
edited by Sir J. H. Lefroy for the Hakluyt Society, 1882.  I have
seen birds on Fernando Po peak quietly await a second shot; and
herds of antelopes, the most timed of animals, in the plains of
Somali-land only stared but were not startled by the report of
the gun.  But Arabs are not the only moralists who write
zoological nonsense: witness the notable verse,

          "Birds in their little nests agree,"

when the feathered tribes are the most pugnacious of breathing
beings.

[FN#266]  Lane finds these details "silly and tiresome or
otherwise objectionable," and omits them.

[FN#267]  Meaning, "Thou hast as yet seen little or nothing."  In
most Eastern tongues a question often expresses an emphatic
assertion. See vol. i. 37.

[FN#268]  Easterns wear as a rule little clothing but it suffices
for the essential purposes of decency and travellers will live
amongst them for years without once seeing an accidental
"exposure of the person." In some cases, as with the Nubian
thong-apron, this demand of modesty requires not a little
practice of the muscles; and we all know the difference in a
Scotch kilt worn by a Highlander and a cockney sportsman.

[FN#269]  Arab. "Shíraj"=oil extracted from rape seed but
especially from sesame.  The Persians pronounce it "Síraj"
(apparently unaware that it is their own word "Shírah"=juice in
Arabic garb) and have coined a participle "Musayrij" e.g., Bú-i-
musayrij, taint of sesame-oil applied especially to the Jews who
very wisely prefer, in Persia and elsewhere, oil which is
wholesome to butter which is not.  The Moslems, however, declare
that its immoderate use in cooking taints the exudations of the
skin.

[FN#270] Arab. "Nakkárún" probably congeners of the redoubtable
"Dandán."

[FN#271]  Bresl. Edit. xi. 78.  The Mac. says "They are all fish"
(Kullu-hum) and the Bul. "Their food (aklu-hum) is fish."

[FN#272]  Arab. "Az'ar," usually=having thin hair.  The general
term for tailless is "abtar."  See Koran cviii. 3, when it means
childless.

[FN#273]  A common formula of politeness.

[FN#274]  Bresl. Edit. xi. 82; meaning, "You will probably keep
it for yourself."  Abdullah of the Sea is perfectly logical; but
grief is not. We weep over the deaths of friends mostly for our
own sake: theoretically we should rejoice that they are at rest;
but practically we are afflicted by the thought that we shall
never again see their pleasant faces.

[FN#275]  i.e. about rejoicing over the newborns and mourning
over the dead.

[FN#276] i.e. Ishak of Mosul, for whom see vol. iv. 119. The
Bresl. Edit. has Fazíl for Fazl.

[FN#277] Abu Dalaf al-Ijili, a well-known soldier equally famed
for liberality and culture.

[FN#278] Arab. "Takhmísh," alluding to the familiar practice of
tearing face and hair in grief for a loss, a death, etc.

[FN#279] i.e. When he is in the very prime of life and able to
administer fiers coups de canif.

          "For ladies e'en of most uneasy virtue
          Prefer a spouse whose age is short of thirty."
                                                  Don Juan 1. 62.

[FN#280] Arab. "Lázuward": see vol. iii. 33.

[FN#281] Arab. "Sidillah." The Bresl. Edit. (v. 99), has, "a
couch of ivory and ebony, whereon was that which befitted it of
mattresses and cushions * * * * and on it five damsels."

[FN#282] i.e. As she untunes the lute by "pinching" the strings
over-excitedly with her right, her other hand retunes it by
turning the pegs.

[FN#283] i.e. The slim cupbearer (Zephyr) and fair-faced girl
(Moon) handed round the bubbling bowl (star).

[FN#284] Arab. "Al-Sath" whence the Span. Azotea. The lines that
follow are from the Bresl. Edit. v. 110.

[FN#285] This "'Ar'ar" is probably the Callitris quadrivalvis
whose resin ("Sandarac") is imported as varnish from African
Mogador to England. Also called the Thuja, it is of cypress
shape, slow growing and finely veined in the lower part of the
base. Most travellers are agreed that it is the Citrus-tree of
Roman Mauritania, concerning which Pliny (xiii. 29) gives curious
details, a single table costing from a million sesterces (£900)
to 1,400,000.  For other details see p. 95, "Morocco and the
Moors," by my late friend Dr. Leared (London: Sampson Low, 1876).

[FN#286] i.e. Kings might sigh for her in vain.

[FN#287] These lines are in vol. viii. 279. I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#288] A most unsavoury comparison to a Persian who always
connects camphor with the idea of a corpse.

[FN#289] Arab. "Ilà má sháa' lláh" i.e. as long as you like.

[FN#290] i.e. of gramarye.

[FN#291] Arab. "Ta'wíz"=the Arab Tilasm, our Talisman, a charm,
an amulet; and in India mostly a magic square. The subject is
complicated and occupies in Herklots some sixty pages, 222-284.

[FN#292] The Bul. and Mac. Edits. give the Princess's malady, in
error, as Dáa al-Sudá' (megrims), instead of Dáa al-Sar'
(epilepsy) as in the Bresl. Edit. The latter would mean that she
is possessed by a demon, again the old Scriptural fancy (see vol.
v. 28). The subject is highly fitted for romance but not for a
"serious" book which ought to know better.

[FN#293] Arab. "Al-'Áriz"=the demon who possessed her.

[FN#294] i.e. He hath renounced his infamous traffic.

[FN#295] Alluding to the favourite Eastern saying, "The poor man
hath no life."

[FN#296] In this and the following lines some change is necessary
for the Bresl. and Mac. texts are very defective. The Arabic word
here translated "recess" is "Aywán," prop. a hall, an open
saloon.

[FN#297] i.e. by selling it for thirty thousand gold pieces, when
he might have got a million for it.

[FN#298] The tale is not in the Bresl. Edit.

[FN#299] Al-Khasíb (= the fruitful) was the son of 'Abd al-Hamíd
and  intendant of the tribute of Egypt under Harun al-Rashid, but
neither Lord nor Sultan. Lane (iii. 669) quotes three couplets in
his honour by Abu Nowás from p. 119 of "Elmacini (Al-Makín)
Historia  Saracenica."

If our camel visit not the land of Al-Khasib,  what man after
Al-Khasib shall they visit?
For generosity is not his neighbour;  nor hath it sojourned near
him;  but generosity goeth wherever he goeth:
He is a man who purchaseth praise with his wealth,  and who
knoweth that the periods of Fortune revolve.

[FN#300] The old story "Alà júdi-k"= upon thy generosity, which
means  at least ten times the price.

[FN#301]i.e. The distance is enormous.

[FN#302] A gazelle but here the slave-girl's name.

[FN#303] See vol. ii. 104. Herklots (Pl. vii. fig. 2) illustrates
the cloth used in playing the Indian game, Pachísí. The "board"
is rather European than Oriental, but it has of late Years spread
far and wide, especially the backgammon board.

[FN#304] i.e. "Father of the Lion."

[FN#305] Or as we should say, "Thy blood will be on thine own
head."

[FN#306] Called after the famous town in Persian Mesopotamia
which however is spelt with the lesser aspirate. See p. 144. The
Geographical works of Sádik-i-Ispaháni, London Oriental Transl.
Fund, 1882. Hamdan (with the greater aspirate) and Hamdun mean
only the member masculine, which may be a delicate piece of chaff
for the gallery

[FN#307] Arab. "Hulwán al-miftáh," for which see vol. vii. 212.
Mr. Payne compares it with the French denier à Dieu. given to the
concierge on like occasions.

[FN#308] Arab. "'Udm," a relish, the Scotch "kitchen," Lat.
Opsonium, Ital. Companatico and our "by-meat." See vol. iv. 128.

[FN#309] Arab. "Kabasa" = he shampoo'd. See vol. ii. 17.

[FN#310] Arab. "Nukl." See supra p. 177.

[FN#311] Arab. "Jannat al-Khuld" and "Firdaus," two of the
Heavens repeatedly noticed.

[FN#312] The naiveté is purely Horatian, that is South European
versus North European.

[FN#313] i.e. "Have some regard for thy life."

[FN#314] Arab. "Awák" plur. of Úkiyyah a word known throughout
the Moslem East. As an ounce it weighs differently in every
country and in Barbary (Mauritania) which we call Morocco, it is
a nominal coin containing twelve Flús (fulús) now about = a
penny. It is a direct descendant from the "Uk" or "Wuk" (ounce)
of the hieroglyphs (See Sharpe's Egypt or any other Manual) and
first appeared in Europe as the Greek {Greek}.

[FN#315] Arab. "Kárah" usually a large bag.

[FN#316] Arab. "Lúlúah," which may mean the Union-pearl; but here
used in the sense of wild cow, the bubalus antelope, alluding to
the farouche nature of Miss Jamilah. We are also told infrà that
the park was full of "Wuhúsh" = wild cattle

[FN#317] Arab. "Sákiyah," the venerable old Persian wheel, for
whos music see Pilgrimage ii. 198. But Sakiyah" is also applied,
as here, to the water-channel which turns the wheel.

[FN#318] Arab. "Kawádís," plur. of "Kádús," the pots round the
rim of the Persian wheel: usually they are of coarse pottery.

[FN#319] In the text "Sákiyah" a manifest error for "Kubbah."

[FN#320] Easterns greatly respect a belle fourchette, especially
when the eater is a lover.

[FN#321] Arab. "'Aríshah," a word of many meanings, tent, nest,
vine- trellis, etc.

[FN#322] To spit or blow the nose in good society is "vulgar."
Sneezing (Al-'Atsah) is a complicated affair. For Talmudic
traditions of death by sneezing see Lane (M. E. chaps. viii).
Amongst Hindus sneezing and yawning are caused by evil spirits
whom they drive away by snapping thumb and forefinger as loudly
as possible. The pagan Arabs held sneezing a bad omen, which
often stopped their journeys. Moslems believe that when Allah
placed the Soul (life ?) in Adam, the dry clay became flesh and
bone and the First Man, waking to life, sneezed and ejaculated
"Alhamdolillah;" whereto Gabriel replied, "Allah have mercy upon
thee, O Adam!" Mohammed, who liked sneezing because accompanied
by lightness of body and openness of pores, said of it, "If a man
sneeze or eructate and say 'Alhamdolillah' he averts seventy
diseases of which the least is leprosy" (Juzám); also "If one of
you sneeze, let him exclaim, 'Alhamdolillah,' and let those
around salute him in return with, 'Allah have mercy upon thee!'
and lastly let him say, 'Allah direct you and strengthen your
condition."' Moderns prefer, "Allah avert what may joy thy foe
!"= (our God bless you!) to which the answer is "Alhamdolillah!"
Mohammed disliked yawning (Suabá or Thuabá), because not
beneficial as a sneeze and said, "If one of you gape and over not
his mouth, a devil leaps into it. " This is still a popular
superstition from Baghdad to Morocco.

[FN#323] A duenna, nursery governess, etc. See vol. i. 231.

[FN#324] For this belief see the tale called "The Night of
Power," vol. vi. 180.

[FN#325] The Anglo-lndian "Kincob" (Kimkh'áb); brocade, silk
flowered with gold or silver. 

[FN#326] Lane finds a needless difficulty in this sentence, which
is far-fetched only because Kuus (cups) requires Ruus (head-tops)
byway of jingle. It means only "'Twas merry in hall when beards
wag all."

[FN#327] The Mac. Edit. gives two couplets which have already
occurred from the Bull Edit i. 540.

[FN#328] The lines are half of four couplets in vol. iv. 192; so
I quote Lane.

[FN#329].i.e. none hath pleased me. I have quoted the popular
saying, "The son of the quarter filleth not the eye." i.e. women
prefer stranger faces.

[FN#330] Here after the favourite Oriental fashion, she tells the
truth but so enigmatically that it is more deceptive than an
untruth; a good Eastern quibble infinitely more dangerous than an
honest downright lie. The consciousness that the falsehood is
part fact applies a salve to conscience and supplies a force
lacking in the mere fib. When an Egyptian lies to you look
straight in his eyes and he will most often betray himself either
by boggling or by a look of injured innocence.

[FN#331] Another true lie.

[FN#332] Arab. `'Yastaghíbuní," lit. = they deem my absence too
long.

[FN#333] An euphemistic form of questioning after absence: "Is
all right with thee?"

[FN#334] Arab. "Kallim al-Sultan!" the formula of summoning which
has often occurred in The Nights.

[FN#335] Lane translates "Almost died," Payne "Well-nigh died;"
but the text says "died." I would suggest to translators

          "Be bould, be bould and every where be bould!"

[FN#336] He is the usual poltroon contrasted with the manly and
masterful girl, a conjunction of the lioness and the lamb
sometimes seen in real life.

[FN#337] That he might see Jamilah as Ibrahim had promised.

[FN#338] A popular saying, i.e., les absents ont tonjours tort.

[FN#339] Who had a prior right to marry her, but not against her
consent after she was of age.

[FN#340] Arab "Sirwál." In Al-Hariri it is a singular form (see
No. ii. of the twelve riddles in Ass. xxiv.), but Mohammed said
to his followers "Tuakhkhizú" (adopt ye) "Saráwílát." The latter
is regularly declinable but the broken form Saráwíl is
imperfectly declinable on account of its "heaviness," as are all
plurals whose third letter is an Alif followed by i or í in the
next syllable.

[FN#341] Arab. "Matarik" from mitrak or mitrakah a small wooden
shield coated with hide This even in the present day is the
policeman's equipment in the outer parts of the East.

[FN#342] Arab. "Sabíyah" for which I prefer Mr. Payne's "young
lady" to Lane's "damsel" the latter should be confined to Járiyah
as both bear the double sense of girl and slave (or servant)
girl. "Bins" again is daughter, maid or simply girl.

[FN#343] The sense of them is found in vol. ii. 41.

[FN#344] Here the text is defective, but I hardly like to supply
the omission. Mr. Payne introduces from below, "for that his
charms were wasted and his favour changed by reason of the much
terror and affliction he had suffered." The next lines also are
very abrupt and unconnected.

[FN#345] Arab. "Yá Mauláya!" the term is still used throughout
Moslem lands; but in Barbary where it is pronounced "Mooláee"
Europeans have converted it to "Muley" as if it had some
connection with the mule. Even in Robinson Crusoe we find "muly"
or "Moly Ismael" (chaps. ii.); and we hear the high-sounding name
Maulá-i-Idrís, the patron saint of the Sunset Land, debased to
"Muley Drís."

[FN#346] Lane omits this tale because "it is very similar, but
inferior in interest, to the Story told by the Sultan's Steward."
See vol. i. 278.

[FN#347] Sixteenth Abbaside A.H. 279–289 (=A.D. 891–902). "He was
comely, intrepid, of grave exterior, majestic in presence, of
considerable intellectual power and the fiercest of the Caliphs
of the House of Abbas. He once had the courage to attack a lion"
(Al-Siyuti). I may add that he was a good soldier and an
excellent administrator, who was called Saffáh the Second because
he refounded the House of Abbas. He was exceedingly fanatic and
died of sensuality, having first kicked his doctor to death, and
he spent his last moments in versifying.

[FN#348] Hamdún bin Ismá'íl, called the Kátib or Scribe, was the
first of his family who followed the profession of a Nadím or
Cup-companion. His son Ahmad (who is in the text) was an oral
transmitter of poetry and history. Al-Siyúti (p. 390) and De
Slane I. Khall (ii. 304) notice him.

[FN#349] Probably the Caliph had attendants, but the text
afterwards speaks of them as two. Mac. Edit. iv. p. 558, line 2;
and a few lines below, "the Caliph and the man with him."

[FN#350] Arab. "Naysábúr," the famous town in Khorasan where
Omar-i-Khayyám (whom our people will call Omar Khayyám) was
buried and where his tomb is still a place of pious visitation. A
sketch of it has lately appeared in the illustrated papers. For
an affecting tale concerning the astronomer-poet's tomb, borrowed
from the Nigáristán see the Preface by the late Mr. Fitzgerald
whose admirable excerpts from the Rubaiyat (101 out of 820
quatrains) have made the poem popular among all the
English-speaking races.

[FN#351] Arab. "A-Sharíf anta?" (with the Hamzah-sign of
interrogation)=Art thou a Sharíf (or descendant of the Apostle)?

[FN#352] Tenth Abbaside (A.H. 234–247=848–861), grandson of
Al-Rashid and born of a slave-concubine. He was famous for his
hatred of the Alides (he destroyed the tomb of Al-Husayn) and
claimed the pardon of Allah for having revised orthodox
traditionary doctrines. He compelled the Christians to wear
collars of wood or leather and was assassinated by five Turks.

[FN#353] His father was Al-Mu'tasim bi 'llah (A.H.
218–227=833–842) the son of Al-Rashid by Máridah a
slave-concubine of foreign origin. He was brave and of high
spirit, but destitute of education; and his personal strength was
such that he could break a man's elbow between his fingers. He
imitated the apparatus of Persian kings; and he was called the
"Octonary" because he was the 8th Abbaside; the 8th in descent
from Abbas; the 8th son of Al-Rashid; he began his reign in A.H.
218; lived 48 years; was born under Scorpio (8th Zodiacal sign);
was victorious in 8 expeditions; slew 8 important foes and left 8
male and 8 female children. For his introducing Turks see vol.
iii, 81.

[FN#354] i.e. as if it were given away in charity.

[FN#355] Arab. "Shukkah," a word much used in the Zanzibar trade
where it means a piece of long-cloth one fathom long. See my
"Lake Regions of Central Africa," vol. i. 147, etc.

[FN#356] He is afterwards called in two places "Khádim"=eunuch.

[FN#357] A courteous way of saying, "Never mind my name: I wish
to keep it hidden." The formula is still popular.

[FN#358] Arab. "Bakhkharaní" i.e. fumigated me with burning
aloes-wood, Calumba or similar material.

[FN#359] In sign of honour. The threshold is important amongst
Moslems: in one of the Mameluke Soldans' sepulchres near Cairo I
found a granite slab bearing the "cartouche" (shield) of Khufu
(Cheops) with the four hieroglyphs hardly effaced.

[FN#360] i.e. One of the concubines by whose door he had passed.

[FN#361] Epistasis without the prostasis, "An she ordered thee so
to do:" the situation justifies the rhetorical figure.

[FN#362] Arab. "Sardáb" see vol. i, 340.

[FN#363] Thirteenth Abbaside A.H. 252–255 (=866–869). His mother
was a Greek slave called Kabíhah (Al-Mas'udi and Al-Siyuti); for
which "Banjah" is probably a clerical error. He was exceedingly
beautiful and was the first to ride out with ornaments of gold.
But he was impotent in the hands of the Turks who caused the mob
to depose him and kill him—his death being related in various
ways.

[FN#364] i.e. The reward from Allah for thy good deed.

[FN#365] Arab. "Nusk" abstinence from women, a part of the
Zahid's asceticism.

[FN#366] Arab. "Munázirah" the verbal noun of which, "Munázarah,"
may also mean "dispute." The student will distinguish between
"Munazarah" and Munafarah=a contention for precedence in presence
of an umpire.

[FN#367] The Mac. Edit. gives by mistake "Abú Dáúd": the Bul.
correctly "Abú Duwád," He was Kázi al-Kuzát (High Chancellor)
under Al-Mu'tasim, Al-Wasik bi'llah (Vathek) and Al-Mutawakkil.

[FN#368] Arab. "Zaffú"=they led the bride to the bridegroom's
house; but here used in the sense of displaying her as both were
in the palace.

[FN#369] i.e. renounce the craft which though not sinful (harám)
is makrúh or religiously unpraiseworthy; Mohammed having objected
to music and indeed to the arts in general.

[FN#370] Arab. "Lá tankati'í;" do not be too often absent from
us. I have noticed the whimsical resemblance of "Kat'" and our
"cut"; and here the metaphorical sense is almost identical.

[FN#371] See Ibn Khallikan ii. 455.

[FN#372] The Turkish body-guard. See vol. iii. 81.

[FN#373] Twelfth Abbaside (A.H. 248-252=862-866) the son of a
slave-concubine Mukhárik. He was virtuous and accomplished,
comely, fair-skinned, pock-marked and famed for defective
pronunciation; and he first set the fashion of shortening men's
capes and widening the sleeves.  After may troubles with the
Turks, who were now the Prætorian guard of Baghdad, he was
murdered at the instigation of Al-Mu' tazz, who succeeded him, by
his Chamberlain Sa'id bin Salíh.

[FN#374] Arab. "Usúl," his forbears, his ancestors.

[FN#375] Lane rejects this tale because it is "extremely
objectionable; far more so than the title might lead me to
expect." But he quotes the following marginal note by his Shaykh:
--"Many persons (women) reckon marrying a second time amongst the
most disgraceful of actions. This opinion is commonest in the
country-towns and villages; and my mother's relations are thus
distinguished; so that a woman of them, when her husband dieth or
divorceth her while she is young, passeth in widowhood her life,
however long it may be, and disdaineth to marry a second time." I
fear that this state of things belongs to the good old days now
utterly gone by; and the loose rule of the stranger, especially
the English, in Egypt will renew the scenes which characterised
Sind when Sir Charles Napier hanged every husband who cut down an
adulterous wife. I have elsewhere noticed the ignorant idea that
Moslems deny to women souls and seats in Paradise, whilst
Mohammed canonised two women in his own family. The theory arose
with the "Fathers" of the Christian Church who simply exaggerated
the misogyny of St. Paul. St. Ambrose commenting on Corinthians
i. ii., boldly says:--"Feminas ad imaginem Dei factas non esse."
St. Thomas Aquinas and his school adopted the Aristotelian view,
"Mulier est erratum naturae, et mas occasionatus, et per accidens
generatur; atque ideo est monstrum." For other instances see
Bayle s. v. Gediacus (Revd. Simon of Brandebourg) who in 1695
published a "Defensio Sexus muliebris," a refutation of an
anti-Socinian satire or squib, "Disputatio perjucunda, Mulieres
homines non esse," Parisiis, 1693. But when Islam arose in the
seventh century, the Christian learned cleverly affixed the
stigma of their own misogyny upon the Moslems ad captandas
foeminas and in Southern Europe the calumny still bears fruit.
Mohammed (Koran, chapt. xxiv.) commands for the first time, in
the sixth year of his mission, the veiling and, by inference, the
seclusion of women, which was apparently unknown to the Badawin
and, if practised in the cities was probably of the laxest. Nor
can one but confess that such modified separation of the sexes,
which it would be impossible to introduce into European manners,
has great and notable advantages. It promotes the freest
intercourse between man and man, and thus civilises what we call
the "lower orders": in no Moslem land, from Morocco to China, do
we find the brutals without manners or morals which are bred by
European and especially by English civilisation. For the same
reason it enables women to enjoy fullest intimacy and friendship
with one another, and we know that the best of both sexes are
those who prefer the society of their own as opposed to "quite
the lady's man" and "quite the gentleman's woman." It also adds
an important item to social decorum by abolishing e.g. such
indecencies as the "ball-room flirtation"--a word which must be
borrowed from us, not translated by foreigners. And especially it
gives to religious meetings, a tone which the presence of women
modifies and not for the better. Perhaps, the best form is that
semiseclusion of the sex, which prevailed in the heroic ages of
Greece, Rome, and India (before the Moslem invasion), and which
is perpetuated in Christian Armenia and in modern Hellas. It is a
something between the conventual strictness of Al-Islam and the
liberty, or rather licence, of the "Anglo-Saxon" and the
"Anglo-American." And when England shall have cast off that
peculiar insularity which makes her differ from all civilised
peoples, she will probably abolish three gross abuses,
time-honoured scandals, which bear very heavily on women and
children. The first is the Briton's right to will property away
from his wife and offspring. The second is the action for "breach
of promise," salving the broken heart with pounds, shillings, and
pence: it should be treated simply as an exaggerated breach of
contract. The third is the procedure popularly called "Crim.
Con.," and this is the most scandalous of all: the offence is
against the rights of property, like robbery or burglary, and it
ought to be treated criminally with fine, imprisonment and in
cases with corporal punishment after the sensible procedure of
Moslem law.

[FN#376] "Moon of the age," a name which has before occurred.

[FN#377] The Malocchio or gettatura, so often noticed.

[FN#378] The crescent of the month Zu 'l-Ka'dah when the
Ramazan-fast is broken. This allusion is common. Comp. vol. i.
84.

[FN#379] This line contains one of the Yes, Yes and No, No
trifles alluded to in vol. ii, 60. Captain Lockett (M. A. 103)
renders it "I saw a fawn upon a hillock whose beauty eclipsed the
full moon. I said, What is thy name? she answered Deer. What my
Dear said I, but she replied, no, no!" To preserve the sound I
have sacrificed sense: Lulu is a pearl, Li? li? (= for me, for
me?) and La! La! = no! no! See vol. i, 217. I should have
explained a line which has puzzled some readers,

   "A sun (face) on wand (neck) in knoll of sand (hips) she
        showed" etc,

[FN#380] Arab. "Al-huwayna," a rare term.

[FN#381] Bright in the eyes of the famishing who is allowed to
break his fast.

[FN#382] Mr. Payne reads "Maghrabi" = a Mauritanian, Maroccan,
the Moors (not the Moorish Jews or Arabs) being a race of
Sodomites from highest to lowest. But the Mac. and Bul. Edit.
have "Ajami."

[FN#383] For "Ishk uzri" = platonic love see vol. i. 232; ii.
104.

[FN#384] Zaynab (Zenobia) and Zayd are generic names for women
and men.

[FN#385] i.e. He wrote "Kasidahs" (= odes, elegies) after the
fashion of the "Suspended Poems" which mostly open with the lover
gazing upon the traces of the camp where his beloved had dwelt.
The exaggerated conventionalism of such exordium shows that these
early poems had been preceded by a host of earlier pieces which
had been adopted as canons of poetry.

[FN#386] The verses are very mal-a-propos, like many occurring in
The Nights, for the maligned Shaykh is proof against all the
seductions of the pretty boy and falls in love with a woman after
the fashion of Don Quixote. Mr. Payne complains of the obscurity
of the original owing to abuse of the figure enallage; but I find
them explicit enough, referring to some debauched elder after the
type of Abu Nowas.

[FN#387] Arab. "'Irk" = a root which must here mean a sprig, a
twig. The basil grows to a comparatively large size in the East.

[FN#388] Arab. "Lait "= one connected with the tribe of Lot, see
vol. v. 161.

[FN#389] For the play upon "Saki" (oblique case of sak, leg-calf)
and Saki a cupbearer see vol. ii. 327.

[FN#390] "On a certain day the leg shall be bared and men shall
be called upon to bow in adoration, but they shall not be able"
(Koran, lxviii. 42). "Baring the leg" implies a grievous
calamity, probably borrowed from the notion of tucking up the
skirts and stripping for flight. On the dangerous San Francisco
River one of the rapids is called "Tira-calcoens" = take off your
trousers (Highlands of the Brazil, ii. 35). But here the allusion
is simply ludicrous and to a Moslem blasphemous.

[FN#391] Arab. "Istahi," a word of every day use in reproof. So
the Hindost. "Kuchh sharm nahin?" hast thou no shame? Shame is a
passion with Orientals and very little known to the West.

[FN#392] i.e. Angels and men saying, "The Peace (of God) be on us
and on all righteous servants of Allah!" This ends every prayer.

[FN#393] Arab. "Al-Niyah," the ceremonial purpose or intent to
pray, without which prayer is null and void. See vol. v. 163. The
words would be "I purpose to pray a two-bow prayer in this hour
of deadly danger to my soul." Concerning such prayer see vol. i.
142.

[FN#394] Arab. "Sakin" = quiescent, Let a sleeping hound lie.

[FN#395] Arab. "Asar" lit. traces i.e. the works, the mighty
signs and marvels.

[FN#396] The mention of coffee now frequently occurs in this tale
and in that which follows: the familiar use of it showing a
comparatively late date, and not suggesting the copyist's hand.

[FN#397] Arab. "Al-Kahwah," the place being called from its
produce. See Pilgrimage i. 317-18.

[FN#398] Arab. "Al-Ghurbah Kurbah:" the translation in the text
is taken from my late friend Edward Eastwick, translator of the
Gulistan and author of a host of works which show him to have
been a ripe Oriental scholar.

[FN#399] The fiction may have been suggested by the fact that in
all Moslem cities from India to Barbary the inner and outer gates
are carefully shut during the noontide devotions, not "because
Friday is the day on which creation was finished and Mohammed
entered Al-Medinah;" but because there is a popular idea that in
times now approaching the Christians will rise up against the
Moslems during prayers and will repeat the "Sicilian Vespers."

[FN#400] i.e. the syndic of the Guild of Jewellers.

[FN#401] This is an Arab Lady Godiva of the wrong sort.

[FN#402] This is explained in my Pilgrimage i. 99 et seq.

[FN#403] About three pennyweights. It varies, however, everywhere
and in Morocco the "Mezkal" as they call it is an imaginary
value, no such coin existing.

[FN#404] i.e. over and above the value of the gold, etc.

[FN#405] This was the custom of contemporary Europe and more than
one master cutler has put to death an apprentice playing Peeping
Tom to detect the secret of sword-making.

[FN#406] Among Moslems husbands are divided into three species;
(1) of "Bahr" who is married for love; (2) of "Dahr," for defence
against the world, and (3) of "Mahr" for marriage-settlements
(money). Master Obayd was an unhappy compound of the two latter;
but he did not cease to be a man of honour.

[FN#407]The Mac. Edit. here is a mass of blunders and misprints.

[FN#408] The Mac. Edit. everywhere calls her "Sabiyah" = the
young lady and does not mention her name Halimah = the Mild, the
Gentle till the cmlxxivth Night. I follow Mr. Payne's example by
introducing it earlier into the story, as it avoids vagueness and
repetition of the indefinite.

[FN#409]  Arab "Adím al-Zauk,"=without savour. applied to an
insipid mannerless man as "bárid" (cold) is to a fool. "Ahl Zauk"
is a man of pleasure, a voluptuary, a hedonist.

[FN#410]  Arab. "Finján" the egg-shell cups from which the
Easterns still drink coffee.

[FN#411]  Arab. "Awáshik" a rare word, which Dozy translates
"osselet" (or osselle) and Mr. Payne, "hucklebones," concerning
which he has obliged me with this note. Chambaud renders osselet
by "petit os avec lequel les enfants jouent." Hucklebone is the
hip-bone but in the plural it applies to our cockals or cockles:
Latham gives "hucklebone," (or cockal), one of the small vertebræ
of the coccygis, and Littleton translates "Talus," a hucklebone,
a bone to play with like a dye, a play called cockal. (So also in
Rider.) Hucklebones and knucklebones are syn.: but the latter is
modern and liable to give a false idea, besides being
tautological. It has nothing to do with the knuckles and derives
from the German "Knochel" (dialectically Knochelein) a bonelet.

[FN#412]  For ablution after sleep and before prayer. The address
of the slave-girl is perfectly natural: in a Moslem house we
should hear it this day, nor does it show the least sign of
"frowardness. "

[FN#413]  The perfect stupidity of the old wittol is told with
the driest Arab humour.

[FN#414]  This is a rechauffé of the Language of Signs in "Azíz
and Azízah" vol. ii. 302.

[FN#415]  In the Mac. Edit. "Yá Fulánah"=O certain person.

[FN#416]  Arab. "Laylat al-Kábilah," lit.=the coming night, our
to-night; for which see vol. iii. 349.

[FN#417]  Arab. "Ya Ahmak!" which in Marocco means a madman, a
maniac, a Santon.

[FN#418]  The whole passage has a grammatical double entendre
whose application is palpable. Harf al-Jarr=a particle governing
the noun in the genitive or a mode of thrusting and tumbling.

[FN#419]  Arab. "Al-Silah" =conjunctive (sentence), also coition;
Al-Mausúl= the conjoined, a grammatical term for relative pronoun
or particle.

[FN#420] Arab. "Tanwin al-Izafah ma'zul" = the nunnation in
construction cast out. "Tanwin" (nunnation) is pronouncing the
vowels of the case-endings of a noun with n un for u
(nominative) in for i (genitive) and an for a (accusative). This
nunnation expresses indefiniteness, e.g. "Malikun"=a king, any
king. When the noun is made definite by the Ma'rifah or article
(al), the Tanwin must be dropped, e.g. Al-Maliku = the King; Al-
Malikun being a grammatical absurdity. In construction or regimen
(izafah) the nunnation must also disappear, as Maliku 'I-Hind) =
the King of Hind (a King of Hind would be Malikun min Muluki
'I-Hind) = a King from amongst the Kings of Hind). Thus whilst
the wife and the lover were conjoined as much as might be, the
hocussed and sleeping husband was dismissed (ma'zul=degraded)
like a nunnation dropped in construction. I may add that the
terminal syllables are invariably dropped in popular parlance and
none but Mr. G. Palgrave (who afterwards ignored his own
assertion) ever found an Arab tribe actually using them in
conversation although they are always pronounced when reading the
Koran and poetry.

[FN#421]  This was a saying of Mohammed about overfrequency of
visits, "Zur ghibban, tazid hubban"=call rarely that friendship
last fairly. So the verse of Al-Mutanabbi,

          "How oft familiarity breeds dislike."

Preston quotes Jesus ben Sirach, {Greek}. Also Al-Hariri (Ass.
xv. of "The Legal"; De Sacy p. 478 1. 2.) "Visit not your friend
more than one day in a month, nor stop longer than that with
him!" Also Ass. xvi. 487, 8. "Multiply not visits to thy friend."
"None so disliked as one visiting too often." (Preston p. 352).
In the Cent nouvelles (52) Nouvelles (No. lii.) the dying father
says to his son:--"Jamais ne vous hantez tent en l'ostel de votre
voisin que lion vous y serve de pain bis." In these matters
Moslems follow the preaching and practice of the Apostle, who was
about as hearty and genial as the "Great Washington." But the
Arab had a fund of dry humour which the Anglo-American lacked
altogether.

[FN#422]  Arab. "'Amal"--action, operation. In Hindostani it is
used (often with an Alif for an Ayn) as intoxication e.g. Amal
pání strong waters and applied to Sharáb (wine), Bozah (Beer),
Tádí (toddy or the fermented juice of the Tád, Borassus
flabelliformis), Naryáli (juice of the cocoa-nut tree) Saynddi
(of the wild date, Elate Sylvestris), Afyún (opium an its
preparations as post=poppy seeds) and various forms of Cannabis
Sativa, as Ganja, Charas, Madad, Sahzi etc. for which see
Herklots' Glossary.

[FN#423] Arab "Sardáb," mostly an underground room (vol. i. 340)
but here a tunnel.

[FN#424]  Arab. "Al-Láwandiyah": this and the frequent mention of
coffee and presently of a watch (sa'ah) show that the tale in its
present state, cannot be older than the end of the sixteenth
century.

[FN#425]  Arab. "Su'bán," vol. i. 172.

[FN#426]  The lines have occurred in vol. i. 238, where I have
noted the punning "Sabr"= patience or aloes. I quote Torrens: the
Templar, however, utterly abolishes the pun in the last couplet:-
-

"The case is not at my command, but in fair Patience hand
I'm set by Him who order'th all and cloth such case command."

"Amr" here=case (circumstance) or command (order) with a
suspicion of reference to Murr=myrrh, bitterness. The reader will
note the resignation to Fate's decrees which here and in host of
places elevates the tone of the book.

[FN#427]  i.e. as one loathes that which is prohibited, and with
a loathing which makes it unlawful for me to cohabit with thee.

[FN#428]  This is quite natural to the sensitive Eastern.

[FN#429]  Hence, according to Moslem and Eastern theory generally
her lewd and treasonable conduct. But in Egypt not a few freeborn
women and those too of the noblest, would beat her hollow at her
own little game. See for instance the booklet attributed to Jalál
al-Siyútí and entitled Kitáh al-Ízáh (Book of Explanation) fí
‘Ilm al-Nikáh (in the Science of Carnal Copulation). There is a
copy of it in the British Museum; and a friend kindly suppl~ed me
with a lithograph from Cairo; warning me that there are doubts
about the authorship.

[FN#430]  These lines have occurred in vol. iii. 214: I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#431] This ejaculation, as the waw shows, is parenthetic;
spoken either by Halimah, by Shahrazad or by the writer.

[FN#432]  Arab. "Kasr" here meaning an upper room.

[FN#433]  To avoid saying, I pardon thee.

[FN#434]  A proverbial saying which here means I could only dream
of such good luck.

[FN#435]  A good old custom amongst Moslems who have had business
transactions with each other: such acquittance of all possible
claims will be quoted on "Judgment-Day," when debts will be
severely enquired into.

[FN#436]  Arab. "Kutr (tract or quarter) Misr," vulgarly
pronounced "Masr." I may remind the reader that the Assyrians
called the Nile-valley "Musur" whence probably the Heb. Misraim a
dual form denoting Upper and Lower Egypt which are still
distinguished by the Arabs into Sa'id and Misr. The hieroglyphic
term is Ta-mera=Land of the Flood; and the Greek Aigyptos is
probably derived from Kahi-Ptah (region of the great God Ptah) or
Ma Ka Ptah (House of the soul of Ptah). The word "Cops" or
"Kopt," in Egyptian "Kubti" and pronounced "Gubti," contains the
same consonants

[FN#437]  Now an unimportant frontier fort and village dividing
Syria-Palestine from Egypt and famed for the French battle with
the Mamelukes (Feb. 19, 1799) and the convention for evacuating
Egypt. In the old times it was an important site built upon the
"River of Egypt" now a dried up Wady; and it was the chief port
of the then populous Najab or South Country. According to
Abulfeda it derived its name (the "boothy," the nest) from a hut
built there by the brothers of Joseph when stopped at the
frontier by the guards of Pharaoh. But this is usual Jewish
infection of history.

[FN#438]  Arab. "Báb." which may also="Chapter" or category. See
vol. i., 136 and elsewhere (index). In Egypt "Báb" sometimes
means a sepulchral cave hewn in a rock (plur. Bíbán) from the
Coptic "Bíb."

[FN#439]  i.e. "The Holy," a town some three marches (60 miles)
N. East of Cairo; thus showing the honour done to our unheroic
hero. There is also a Sálihlyah quarter or suburb of Damascus
famous for its cemetery of holy men, but the facetious Cits
change the name to Zálliniyah=causing to stray; in allusion to
its Kurdish population. Baron von Hammer reads "le faubourg
Adelieh" built by Al-Malik Al-Adil and founded a chronological
argument on a clerical error.

[FN#440]  Kamar al-Zaman; the normal pun on the name; a practice
as popular in the East as in the West, and worthy only of a
pickpocket in either place.

[FN#441]  Arab. "Azrár" plur. of "Zirr" and lit. = 'buttons,"
i.e. of his robe collar from which his white neck and face appear
shining as the sun.

[FN#442]  Arab. "Dáirah" the usual inclosure of Kanáts or
tent-flaps pitched for privacy during the halt.

[FN#443]  i.e. it was so richly ornamented that it resembled an
enchanted hoard whose spells, hiding it from sight, had been
broken by some happy treasure seeker.

[FN#444]  The merchant who is a "stern parent" and exceedingly
ticklish on the Pundonor saw at first sight her servile origin
which had escaped the mother. Usually it is the other way.

[FN#445]  Not the head of the Church, or Chief Pontiff, but the
Chief of the Olema and Fukahá (Fákihs or D.D.'s.) men learned in
the Law (divinity). The order is peculiarly Moslem, in fact the
succedaneum for the Christian "hierarchy " an institution never
contemplated by the Founder of Christianity. This title shows the
modern date of the tale.

[FN#446]  Arab. "Maulid," prop. applied to the Birth-feast of
Mohammed which begins on the 3rd day of Rabí al-Awwal (third
Moslem month) and lasts a week or ten days (according to local
custom), usually ending on the 12th and celebrated with salutes
of cannon, circumcision feasts. marriage banquets. Zikr-litanies,
perfections of the Koran and all manner of solemn festivities
including the "powder-play" (Láb al-Bárút) in the wilder corners
of Al-Islam. It is also applied to the birth-festivals of great
Santons (as Ahmad al- Badawi) for which see Lane M. E. chaps.
xxiv. In the text it is used like the Span. "Funcion" or the Hind
"Tamáshá," any great occasion of merry-making.

[FN#447]  Arab. "Sanájik" Plur. of Sanjak (Turk.) = a banner,
also applied to the bearer (ensign or cornet) and to a military
rank mostly corresponding with Bey or Colonel.

[FN#448] I have followed Mr. Payne's ordering of the text which,
both in the Mac. and Bull. Edits., is wholly inconsequent and has
not the excuse of rhyme.

[FN#449]  Arab. "Jilbáb," a long coarse veil or gown which in
Barbary becomes a "Jallábiyah," in a striped and hooded cloak of
woollen stuff.

[FN#450]  i.e. a broken down pilgrim left to die on the road.

[FN#451]  These lines have occurred in vol. i. 272. I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#452]  Note the difference between "Zirt," the loud crepitus
and "Faswah" the susurrus which Captain Grose in his quaint
"Lexicum Balatronicum," calls a "fice" or a "foyse" (from the
Arabic Fas, faswah ?).

[FN#453] These lines have occurred in Night dcxix, vol. vi. 246;
where the pun on Khaliyah is explained. I quote Lane.

[FN#454]  The usual pretext of "God bizness," as the Comoro men
call it. For the title of the Ka'abah see my Pilgrimage vol. iii.
149.

[FN#455]  This was in order to travel as a respectable man, he
could also send the girl as a spy into the different Harims to
learn news of the lady who had eloped.

[FN#456]  A polite form of alluding to their cursing him.

[FN#457]  i.e. on account of the King taking offence at his
unceremonious departure.

[FN#458]  i.e. It will be the worse for him.

[FN#459]  I would here remind the reader that "'Arabiyyun" pl.
'Urb is a man of pure Arab race, whether of the Ahl al-Madar
(=people of mortar, i.e. citizens) or Ahl al-Wabar (=tents of
goat or camel's hair); whereas "A'rábiyyun" pl. A'ráb is one who
dwells in the Desert whether Arab or not. Hence the verse:--

          "They name us Al-A'ráb but Al-'Urb is our name."

[FN#460]  I would remind the reader that the Dinár is the golden
denarius (or solidus) of Eastern Rome while the Dirham is the
silver denarius, whence denier, danaro, dínheiro, etc., etc. The
oldest diners date from A.H. 91-92 (=714-15) and we find the
following description of one struck in A.H. 96 by Al-Walid the
VI. Ommiade:--

Obverse:
     Area.     "There is no iláh but Allah: He is one: He hath no
               partner."
     Circle.   "Mohammed is the Messenger of Allah who hath sent
               him with the true Guidance and Religion that he
               manifest it above all other Creeds."

Reverse:
     Area.     "Allah is one: Allah is Eternal: He begetteth not,
               nor is He begot."
     Circle.   "Bismillah: This Dinar was struck anno 96."

See "'Ilâm-en-Nas" (warnings for Folk) a pleasant little volume
by Mr. Godfrey Clarke (London, King and Co., 1873), mostly
consisting of the minor tales from The Nights especially this
group between Nights ccxlvii. and cdlxi.; but rendered valuable
by the annotations of my old friend, the late Frederick Ayrton.

[FN#461]  The reader will note the persistency with which the
duty of universal benevolence is preached.

[FN#462]  Arab. from Pers. "Shah-bander": see vol. iv. 29.

[FN#463]  i.e. of thy coming, a popular compliment.

[FN#464]  This is the doctrine of the universal East; and it is
true concerning wives and widows, not girls when innocent or
rather ignorant. According to Western ideas Kamar al-Zaman was a
young scoundrel of the darkest dye whose only excuses were his
age, his inexperience and his passions.

[FN#465]  Arab. "Dayyús" prop. = a man who pimps for his own wife
and in this sense constantly occurring in conversation.

[FN#466]  This is taking the law into one's own hands with a
witness, yet amongst races who preserve the Pundonor in full and
pristine force, e.g. the Afghans and the Persian Iliyat, the
killing so far from being considered murder or even justifiable
homicide would be highly commended by public opinion.

[FN#467]  Arab. "Nákisátu'aklin wa dín": the words are attributed
to the Prophet whom we find saying, "Verily in your wives and
children ye have an enemy, wherefore beware of them" (Koran lxiv.
14): compare 1 Cor. vii. 28, 32. But Maître Jehan de Meung went
farther,

          "Toutes êtez, serez ou fûses
           De faict ou de volonté, putes."

[FN#468]  Arab. "Habíbí wa tabíbí," the common jingle.

[FN#469]  Iblis and his connection with Diabolos has been noticed
in vol. i. 13. The word is foreign as well as a P.N. and
therefore is imperfectly declined, although some authorities
deduce it from "ablasa"=he despaired (of Allah's mercy). Others
call him Al-Háris (the Lion) hence Eve's first-born was named in
his honour Abd al-Harts. His angelic name was Azázíl before he
sinned by refusing to prostrate himself to Adam, as Allah had
commanded the heavenly host for a trial of faith, not to worship
the first man, but to make him a Keblah or direction of prayer
addressed to the Almighty. Hence he was ejected from Heaven and
became the arch enemy of mankind (Koran xviii. 48). He was an
angel but related to the Jinn: Al-Bayzáwi, however (on Koran ii.
82), opines that angelic by nature he became a Jinn by act. Ibn
Abbas held that he belonged to an order of angels who are called
Jinn and begot issue as do the nasnás, the Ghúl and the Kutrub
which, however are male and female, like the pre-Adamite manwoman
of Genesis, the "bi-une" of our modern days. For this subject see
Terminal Essay.


[FN#470]  As usual in the East and in the West the husband was
the last to hear of his wife's ill conduct. But even Othello did
not kill Emilia.

[FN#471]  i.e. Star of the Morning: the first word occurs in Bar
Cokba Barchocheba=Son of the Star, i.e., which was to come out of
Jacob (Numbers xxiv. 17). The root, which does not occur in Heb.,
is Kaukab to thine. This Rabbi Akilah was also called Bar Cozla=
Son of the Lie.

[FN#472]  Here some excision has been judged advisable as the
names of the bridegrooms and the brides recur with damnable
iteration.

[FN#473]  See the note by Lane's Shaykh at the beginning of the
tale. The contrast between the vicious wife of servile origin and
the virtuous wife of noble birth is fondly dwelt upon but not
exaggerated.

[FN#474]  i.e. those of his water skins for the journey, which as
usual required patching and supplying with fresh handles after
long lying dry.

[FN#475]  A popular saying also applied to men. It is usually
accompanied with showing the open hand and a reference to the
size of the fingers. I find this story most interesting from an
anthropological point of view; suggesting how differently various
races regard the subject of adultery. In Northern Europe the
burden is thrown most unjustly upon the man, the woman who tempts
him being a secondary consideration; and in England he is
absurdly termed "a seducer." In former times he was "paraded" or
"called out," now he is called up for damages, a truly ignoble
and shopkeeper-like mode of treating a high offence against
private property and public morality. In Anglo-America, where
English feeling is exaggerated, the lover is revolver'd and the
woman is left unpunished. On the other hand, amongst Eastern and
especially Moslem peoples, the woman is cut down and scant
reckoning is taken from the man. This more sensible procedure has
struck firm root amongst the nations of Southern Europe where the
husband kills the lover only when he still loves his wife and
lover like is furious at her affection being alienated.

Practically throughout the civilised world there are only two
ways of treating women, Moslems keep them close, defend them from
all kinds of temptations and if they go wrong kill them.
Christians place them upon a pedestal, the observed of all
observers, expose them to every danger and if they fall, accuse
and abuse them instead of themselves.  And England is so grandly
logical that her law, under certain circumstances, holds that
Mrs. A. has committed adultery with Mr. B. but Mr. B. has not
committed adultery with Mrs. A. Can any absurdity be more absurd?
Only "summum jus, summa injuria." See my Terminal Essay. I shall
have more to say upon this curious subject, the treatment of
women who can be thoroughly guarded only by two things, firstly
their hearts and secondly by the "Spanish Padlock."

[FN#476] Lane owns that this is "one of the most entertaining tales
in the work," but he omits it "because its chief and best portion
is essentially the same as the story of the First of the Three
Ladies of Baghdad." The truth is he was straitened for space by
his publisher and thus compelled to cut out some of the best
stories in The Nights.

[FN#477] i.e. Ibrahim of Mosul, the musician poet often mentioned
in The Nights. I must again warn the reader that the name is
pronounced Is-hák (like Isaac with a central aspirate) not Ishák.
This is not unnecessary when we hear Tait-shill for Tait's hill
and "Frederick-shall" for Friedrich, shall.

[FN#478] i.e. He was a proficient, an adept.

[FN#479] Arab. from Pers. Dúláb=a waterwheel, a buttery, a
cupboard.

[FN#480] Arab. "Futúr," the chhotí házirí of Anglo-India or
breakfast proper, eaten by Moslems immediately after the dawn-
prayer except in Ramázán. Amongst sensible people it is a
substantial meal of bread and boiled beans, eggs, cheese, curded
milk and the pastry called fatírah, followed by coffee and a
pipe. See Lane M. E. chapt. v. and my Pilgrimage ii. 48.

[FN#481] This "off-with-his-head" style must not be understood
literally. As I have noted, it is intended by the writer to show
the Kingship and the majesty of the "Vicar of Allah."

[FN#482] Lit. "the calamity of man (insán) is from the tongue"
(lisán).

[FN#483] For Khatt Sharíf, lit.=a noble letter, see vol. ii. 39.

[FN#484] Arab. "Allah yastura-k"=protect thee by hiding what had
better be hidden.

[FN#485] Arab. "Janázír"=chains, an Arabised plural of the Pers.
Zanjír with the metathesis or transposition of letters peculiar
to the vulgar; "Janázír" for "Zanájír."

[FN#486] Arab. "Safínah"=(Noah's) Ark, a myth derived from the
Baris of Egypt with subsequent embellishments from the Babylonian
deluge-legends: the latter may have been survivals of the days
when the waters of the Persian Gulf extended to the mountains of
Eastern Syria. Hen