7.  Of the Merchant Abul Hassan al-Omani (164).
  168.  Of Imnil Echarib (168).
  169.  Of Moted Bila.
 *170.  Of Kamasi Zemuan (167).
 *171.  Of Abdulah Imni Fasil (168).
 *172.  The Story of Maroof (169).




     IMITATIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS WORKS HAVING MORE OR LESS
                  CONNECTION WITH THE NIGHTS.



The success of Galland's work led to the appearance of numerous
works more or less resembling it, chiefly in England and France.
Similar imitations, though now less numerous, have continued to
appear down to the present day.

The most important of the older works of this class were
published in French in the "Cabinet des Fées" (Amsterdam and
Geneva, 1785-1793; 41 vols.); in English in "Tales of the East:
comprising the most popular Romances of Oriental origin, and the
best imitations by European authors, with new translations and
additional tales never before published, to which is prefixed an
introductory dissertation, containing an account of each work and
of its author or translator. By Henry Weber, Esq." (Edinburgh,
1812, 3 vols.); and in German in "Tausand und ein Tag.
Morgenländische Erzählungen aus dem Persisch, Turkisch und
Arabisch, nach Petis de la Croix, Galland, Cardonne, Chavis und
Cazotte, dem Grafen Caylus, und Anderer. Übersetzt von F. H. von
der Hagen" (Prenzlau, 1827-1837, 11 vols.). In the "Cabinet des
Fées" I find a reference to an older collection of tales (partly
Oriental) called the "Bibliothèque des Fées et des Génies," by
the Abbé de la Porte, which I have not seen, but which is, in
part, incorporated in the "Cabinet." It formed only 2 vols. 12mo,
and was published in 1765.

The examination of these tales is difficult, for they comprise
several classes, not always clearly defined:--

1.   Satires on The Nights themselves (e.g. the Tales of the
     Count of Hamilton).
2.   Satires in an Oriental garb (e.g. Beckford's Vathek).
3.   Moral tales in an Oriental garb (e.g. Mrs. Sheridan's
     Nourjahad).
4.   Fantastic tales with nothing Oriental about them but the
     name (e.g. Stevenson's New Arabian Nights).
5.   Imitations pure and simple (e.g. G. Meredith's Shaving of
     Shagpat).
6.   Imitations more or less founded on genuine Oriental sources
     (e.g. the Tales of the Comte de Caylus).
7.   Genuine Oriental Tales (e.g. Mille et une Jours, translated
     by Petis de la Croix).

Most of the tales belonging to Class 7 and some of those
belonging to Class 6 have been treated of in previous sections.
The remaining tales and imitations will generally need only a
very brief notice; sometimes only the title and the indication of
the class to which they belong. We will begin with an enumeration
of the Oriental contents of the Cabinet des Fées, adding W. i.,
ii. and iii. to show which are included in Weber's "Tales of the
East":--

7-11.     1001 Nuits (W. 1).
12, 13. Les Aventures d'Abdalla (W. iii).
14, 15.   1001 Jours (Persian tales, W. ii.). 16. Histoire de la
          Sultane de Perse et des Visirs. Contes Turcs (Turkish
          tales, W. 3==our 251).
16.  Les Voyages de Zulma dans le pays des Fées.
17, 18. Contes de Bidpai.
19.  Contes Chinois, on les Aventures merveilleuses du Mandarin
     Fum-Hoam (W. iii.). 21, 22. Les Mille et un Quart d'Heures.
     Contes Tartares (W. iii.).
22, 23. Les Sultanes de Guzerath, ou les Songes des hommes
eveillés. Contes Moguls (W. iii.).
25.  Nouveaux Contes Orientaux, par le Comte de Caylus (W. ii.).
29, 30. Les Contes des Génies (W. iii.).
30.  Les Aventures de Zelouide et d'Amanzarifdine.
30.  Contes Indiens par M. de Moncrif.
33.  Nourjahad (W. ii.).
34.  Contes de M. Pajon.
38-41. Les Veillées du Sultan Schahriar, &c. (Chavis and Cazotte;
cf. anteà, p. 419; W. i. ii.).

(Weber also includes, in his vol. ii. Nos. 21a, 22, 32 and 37,
after Caussin de Perceval.)

12, 13. The Adventures of Abdallah, the Son of Hanif (Class 5 or
6).

Originally published in 1713; attributed to M. de Bignon, a young
Abbé. A series of romantic travels, in which Eastern and Western
fiction is mixed; for instance, we have the story of the Nose-
tree, which so far as I know has nothing Oriental about it.

16.  The Voyages of Zulma in Fairy Land (Class 4).

European fairy tales, with nothing Oriental about them but the
names of persons and places. The work is unfinished.

17, 18.   The Tales of Bidpai (translated by Galland) are Indian,
          and therefore need no further notice here.

19-23. Chinese, Tartarian and Mogul Tales (Class 6).

Published in 1723, and later by Thomas Simon Gueulette.

Concerning these tales, Mr. Clouston remarks (in litt.): "Much of
the groundwork of these clever imitations of the Arabian Nights
has been, directly or indirectly, derived from Eastern sources;
for instance, in the so-called Tartar tales, the adventures of
the Young Calender find parallels, (1) in the well-known Bidpai
tale of the Bráhman, the Sharpers and the Goat (Kalila and Dimna,
Pánchatantra, Hitopadesa, &c.) and (2) in the worldwide story of
the Farmer who outwitted the Six Men (Indian Antiquary, vol. 3)
of which there are many versions current in Europe, such as the
Norse tale of Big Peter and Little Peter, the Danish tale of
Great Claus and Little Claus; the German tale (Grimm) of the
Little Farmer; the Irish tale of Little Fairly (Samuel Lover's
collection of Irish Fairy Legends and Stories); four Gaelic
versions in Campbell's Popular Tales of the West Highlands; a
Kaba'il version in Riviere's French collection (Contes populaires
Kabylies); Uncle Capriano in Crane's recently published Italian
Popular Tales; and a Latin mediaeval version (written probably in
the I **1th century) in which the hero is called ‘Unibos,'
because he had only one cow."

25.  Oriental Tales (Class 6).

Mr. Clouston observes, "Appeared in 1749,[FN#472] and on the
title page are said to have been translated from MSS. in the
Royal French Library. The stories are, however, largely the
composition of De Caylus himself, and those elements of them
which are traceable to Asiatic sources have been considerably
Frenchified."

Nevertheless they are not without interest, and are nearly all of
obviously Oriental origin. One of the stories is a fantastic
account of the Birth of Mahomet, including romantic travels
largely borrowed from No. 132a. Another story is a version of
that of the Seven Sleepers. Other noteworthy tales are the story
of the Dervish Abounader, which resembles Nos. 193 and 216d; and
the story of Naerdan and Guzulbec, which is a tale of magical
illusions similar to that of Monia Emin, in the Turkish story of
Jewad.

The Count de Caylus was the author of various European as well as
Oriental fairy tales. Of his Oriental collection, Sir R. F.
Burton remarks:--"The stories are not Eastern but Western fairy
tales proper, with kings and queens, giants and dwarfs, and
fairies, good and bad. ‘Barbets' act as body guard and army.
Written in good old style, and free language, such as, for
instance, son pétenlaire, with here and there a touch of salt
humour, as in Rosanie ‘Charmante reine (car on n'a jamais parlé
autrement à une reine, quel que laide qu'elle ait été).'"

29, 30. Tales of the Genii (Class 3).

Written in the middle of the last century by Rev. James Ridley,
but purporting to be translated from the Persian of Horam, the
son of Asmar, by Sir Charles Morell.

These tales have been reprinted many times; but it is very
doubtful if they are based on any genuine Oriental sources. The
amount of Oriental colouring may be guessed from the story of
Urad, who having consented to become the bride of a Sultan on
condition that he should dismiss all his concubines, and make her
his sole queen (like Harald Harfagr on his marriage with
Ragnhilda), is presented to his loving subjects as their Sultana!

32.  Adventures of Zeloide and Amanzarifdine. Indian Tales, by M.
     de Moncrif (Class 4). Ordinary European Fairy Tales, with
     the scene laid in the East.

33.  Nourjahad, by Mrs. Sheridan (Class 3).

An unworthy favourite is reformed by a course of practical moral
lessons conveyed by the Sultan through supposed supernatural
agencies. Mr. Clouston regards it as "one of the very best of the
imitations of Eastern fiction. The plot is ingeniously conceived
and well wrought out, and the interest never flags throughout."

34.  Pajon's Oriental Tales (Class 5). These demand no special
     notice.

In addition to the above, the following Oriental works are
mentioned in the Cabinet des Fées, but not reprinted:

   1. Apologues orientaux, par l'abbé Blanchet.
   2. Mélanges de littérature orientale, par Cardonne. (Paris, 2
vols. 1770.)
   3. Neraïr et Meloe, roman oriental, par H. B. Deblanes (1759).
   4. Contes orientaux, par M. de la Dixmerie.
   5. Les Cinq Cent Matinées et une demie, contes Syriens, par le
chevalier de Duclos.
   6. Abassâi, conte oriental, par Mademoiselle Fault (ou
Fauques) 1752.
   7. Les Contes du Serail, par Mdlle. Fault (1753.)
   8. Kara Mustapha, conte oriental, par Fromaget (1745).
   9. Zilia et Cénie, par Francoise d'Isembourg d'Hippincourt de
Graffigny.
 10. Salned et Garalde, conte oriental, par A. H. De la Motte.
 11. Anecdotes orientales, par G. Mailhol (2 vols. 1752).
 12. Alzahel, traduit d'un manuscrit arabe, par Mdlle. Raigné de
Malfontaine (Mercure, 1773).
 13. Mahmoud le Gasnevide, conte oriental, par J. F. Melon.
 14. Contes Orientaux, ou les recits du Sage Caleb, voyageur
persan, par Mme. Mouet.
 15. Nadir, par A. G. de Montdorge.
 16. Lettres Persanes, de Montesquieu.
 17. Les Amusements de Jour, ou recueil de petits contes, par
Mme. de Mortemar.
 18. Mirloh, conte oriental, par Martine de Morville (1769).
 19. Ladila, anecdote turque (par la même) 1769.
 20. Daira, histoire orientale, par A. J. J. de la Riche de la
Poupelinière (1761).
 21. Cara Mustapha, par de Preschat.
 22. Des trois Nations, conte oriental, par Marianne Robert
(1760).
 23. Contes Orientaux, tirés des manuscrits de la Bibliothèque du
Roi, 2 vols. 12mo (1749).

This is the same as the Count de Caylus' Oriental Tales. Sir R.
F. Burton has received the following memorandum, respecting a
copy of an earlier edition of the same work: "Contes Orientaux,
tirés des manuscrits de la Bibliothèque du Roy de France, ornés
de figures en taille douce. A la Haye, 1743, 2 vols. 12mo,
polished calf gilt, gilt edges, arms in gilt on the sides.

"The Preface says, ‘M. Petit et M. Galland n'ont en aucune
connaissance des manuscrits dont cet ouvrage est tiré.'

"The Tales are from the MSS. and translations sent by those
despatched by the French Ministers to Constantinople to learn
Arabic, &c., and so become fit to act as Dragomans and
Interpreters to the French Embassy."

There is a copy of this work in the British Museum; it proves, as
I expected, to be the series of tales subsequently attributed to
the Count de Caylus.

In addition to the above, the following, of which I can only give
the names, are mentioned in the Cabinet des Fées, but not
reprinted:--

 1.  Alma-Moulin, conte oriental, 1779.
 2.  Gengiskan, histoire orientale, par M. de St. M.
 3.  Almanzor et Zelira, conte arabe, par M. Bret. (1772). {From
     "les mercures."}
 4.  Almerine et Zelima, ou les Dangers de la Beauté, conte
     orientale, 1773. {From "les mercures."}
 5.  Les Ames, conte arabe, par M. B--------. {From "les
     mercures."}
 6.  Balky, conte oriental, 1768. {From "les mercures."}
 7.  Mirza, ou Is necessité d'etre utile (1774). {From "les
     mercures."}
 8.  Zaman, histoire orientale, par M. B. {From "les mercures."}
 9.  Anecdotes Orientales, par Mayol, 1752.12mo.
 10.      Contes très moguls.
 11.      Foka ou les Metamorphoses, conte chinois. Derobé à M.
          de V. 1777. 12mo.
 12.      Mahulem, histoire orientale. 12mo, 1776.
 13.      Mille et une heure, contes Peruviens. 4 vols. 12mo,
          1733.
 14.      Histoire de Khedy, Hermite de Mont Ararat. Conte
          orientale, traduit de l'Anglais, 12mo, 1777.
 15.      Zambeddin, histoire orientale. 12mo, 1768.
 16.      Zelmoille et Zulmis et Turlableu. Par M. l'Abbé de
          Voisem, 12mo, 1747.
 17.      Roman Oriental, Paris, 1753.

The remaining imitations, &c., known to me I shall place roughly
in chronological order, premising that I fear the list must be
very incomplete, and that I have met with very few except in
English and French.




                           A.--French



1.   Zadig, ou la Destinée, par Voltaire[FN#473] probably
partakes of classes 2 and 6; said to be partly based on
Gueulette's "Soirées Bretonnes," published in 1712. The latter is
included in Cabinet des Fées, Vol. 32.

2.   Vathek, an Arabian Tale, by William Beckford. I include this
book here because it was written and first published in French.
Its popularity was once very great, and it contains some
effective passages, though it belongs to Class 2, and is rather a
parody than an imitation of Oriental fiction. The Caliph Vathek,
after committing many crimes at the instance of his mother, the
witch Carathis, in order to propitiate Eblis, finally starts on
an expedition to Istakar. On the way, he seduces Nouronihar, the
beautiful daughter of the Emir Fakreddin, and carries her with
him to the Palace of Eblis, where they am condemned to wander
eternally, with their hearts surrounded with flames.

This idea (which is certainly not Oriental, so far as I know)
took the fancy of Byron, who was a great admirer of Vathek, and
he has mixed it with genuine Oriental features in a powerful
passage in the Giaour, beginning:

          "But thou, false infidel! shalt writhe
          Beneath avenging Monkir's scythe;
          And from its torment 'scape alone
          To wander round lost Eblis' throne;
          And fire unquenched, unquenchable,
          Around, within thy heart shall dwell;
          Nor ear can hear, nor tongue can tell
          The tortures of that inward hell!" &c.

How errors relative to Eastern matters are perpetuated is
illustrated by the fact that I have seen these lines quoted in
some modern philosophical work as descriptive of the hell in
which the Mohammedans believe!

Southey, in Thalaba, b. 1., speaks of the Sarsar, "the Icy Wind
of Death," an expression which he probably borrowed from Vathek.

3.   The Count of Hamilton's Fairy Tales. Written shortly after
     the first publication of Galland's work. There is an English
     Translation among Bohn's Extra Volumes.

4.   Les Mille et un Fadaises, par Cazotte. Class 1. I have not
     seen them.

5.   La Mille et deuxième Nuit, par Theophilus Gautier (Paris,
     1880). Probably Class 1 or 2; I have not seen it.




                          B.--English.



1.   The Vision of Mirza (Addison in the "Spectator"). Class 3.

2.   The Story of Amurath. Class 3. I do not know the author. I
read it in a juvenile book published about the end of last
century, entitled the Pleasing Instructor.

3.   The Persian Tales of Inatulla of Delhi. Published in 1768,
by Colonel Alexander Dow at Edinburgh. A French translation
appeared at Amsterdam in two vols. and in Paris in one vol.
(1769). Class 6. Chiefly founded on a wellknown Persian work, of
which a more correct, though still incomplete, version was
published in 3 vols. by Jonathan Scott in 1799, under the title
of Bahar Danush, or Garden of Knowledge.

5.   Rasselas, by Samuel Johnson. Class 3. Too well known to need
     comment.

6.   Almoran and Hamet, by Dr. Hawksworth. Class 3. Very popular
at the beginning of the present century, but now forgotten.

7.   Oriental Fairy Tales (London, 1853). Class 4. A series of
very pretty fairy tales, by an anonymous author, in which the
scene is laid in the East (especially Egypt).

8.   The Shaving of Shagpat, by George Meredith (London, 1855).
Class 5. I prefer this to most other imitations of an Oriental
tale.

9.   The Thousand and One Humbugs. Classes 1 and 2. Published in
"Household Words," vol. xi. (1855) pp. 265-267, 289-292, 313-316.
Parodies on Nos. 1, 195, 6d, and 6e,f.

10.  Eastern Tales, by many story-tellers. Compiled and edited
from ancient and modern authors by Mrs. Valentine, author of "Sea
Fights and Land Battles," &c. (Chandos Classics.)

In her preface, the authoress states that the tales "are gathered
from both ancient and modern French, Italian and English
sources."

Contains 14 tales, some genuine, others imitations, One,
"Alischar and Smaragdine," is a genuine story of The Nights (No.
41 of our Table), and is probably taken from Trébutien. Three
tales, "Jalaladeen," "Haschem," and "Jussuf," are Grimm's
imitations, taken probably from the composite English edition of
1847, and with the same illustrations. "The Seven Sleepers" and
the "Four Talismans" are from the Count de Caylus' tales;
"Halechalbe" and "Bohetzad" (our No. 174) are from Chavis and
Cazotte; "The Enchanters" and "Urad" are from the "Tales of the
Genii"; and "The Pantofles" is the well-known story of the miser
Casem and his slippers, but I know not where it first appeared.
The remaining three tales are unknown to me, and as I have seen
no volume of Italian Oriental tales, some, no doubt, are derived
from the Italian sources of which the authoress spoke. They are
the following: "The Prince and the Lions," "The City of the
Demons" (a Jewish story purporting to have been written in
England) and "Sadik Beg."

11.  New Arabian Nights, by R. L. Stevenson (London, 1882).

12.  More New Arabian Nights. The Dynamiter. By R. L. Stevenson
     and Vander Grift (London, 1882). Class 4.

Of these tales, Sir R. F. Burton observes, "The only visible
connection with the old Nights is in the habit of seeking
adventures under a disguise. The method is to make the main idea
possible and the details extravagant. In another ‘New Arabian
Nights,' the joint production of MM. Brookfield, Besant and
Pollock, the reverse treatment is affected, the leading idea
being grotesque and impossible, and the details accurate and
lifelike."




                          C.--German.



It is quite possible that there are many imitations in German,
but I have not met with them. I can only mention one or two tales
by Hauff (the Caliph turned Stork, and the Adventures of Said); a
story called "Ali and Gulhindi," by what author I do not now
remember; and some imitations said to be by Grimm, already
mentioned in reference to the English composite edition of 1847.
They are all European fairy tales, in an Eastern dress.




                          CONCLUSION.



Among books specially interesting to the student of The Nights, I
may mention Weil's "Biblische Legenden der Muselmänner, aus
arabischen Quellen zusammengetragen, und mit jüdischen Sagen
verglichen" (Frankfort-on-Main, 1845). An anonymous English
translation appeared in 1846 under the title of "The Bible, the
Koran, and the Talmud," and it also formed one of the sources
from which the Rev. S. Baring-Gould compiled his "Legends of Old
Testament Characters" (2 vols., 1871). The late Prof. Palmer's
"Life of Haroun Al-Raschid" (London, 1881), is not much more than
a brief popular sketch. The references to The Nights in English
and other European literatures are innumerable; but I cannot
refrain from quoting Mark Twain's identification of Henry the
Eighth with Shahryar (Huckleberry Finn, chap. xxiii).

"My, you ought to have seen old Henry the Eighth when he was in
bloom. He was a blossom. He used to marry a new wife every day,
and chop off her head next morning. And he would do it just as
indifferent as if he was ordering up eggs. "Fetch up Nell Gwynn,"
he says. They fetch her up. Next morning, "Chop off her head."
And they chop it off. "Fetch up Jane Shore," he says; and up she
comes. Next morning, "Chop off her head." And they chop it off.
"Ring up Fair Rosamun." Fair Rosamun answers the bell. Next
morning, "Chop off her head." And he made every one of them tell
him a tale every night, and he kept that up till he had hogged a
thousand and one tales that way, and then he put them all in a
book, and called it Domesday Book--which was a good name, and
stated the case. You don't know kings, Jim, but I know them, and
this old rip of ourn is one of the cleanest I've struck in
history. Well, Henry, he takes a notion he wants to get up some
trouble with this country. How does he do it--give notice?--give
the country a show? No. All of a sudden he heaves all the tea in
Boston Harbour overboard, and whacks out a declaration of
independence, and dares them to come on. That was his style--he
never give anybody a chance. He had suspicions of his father, the
Duke of Wellington. Well, what did he do?--ask him to show up?
No--drownded him in a butt of mamsey, like a cat. Spose people
left money laying around where he was--what did he do? He
collared it. Spose he contracted to do a thing, and you paid him,
and didnt set down there and see that he done it--what did he do?
He always done the other thing. Spose he opened his mouth--what
then? If he didnt shut it up powerful quick, he'd lose a lie,
every time. That's the kind of a bug Henry was."




COMPARATIVE TABLE OF THE TALES IN THE PRINCIPAL
     EDITIONS OF THE THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS, viz.:--



 1. Galland.
 2. Caussin de Perceval.
 3. Gauttier.
 4. Scott's MS. (Wortley Montague).
 5. Ditto (Anderson; marked A).
 6. Scott's Arabian Nights.
 7. Scott's Tales and Anecdotes (marked A).
 8. Von Hammer's MS.
 9. Zinserling.
10. Lamb.
11. Trébutien.
12. Bul. text.
13. Lane.
14. Bres. text.
15. Habicht.
16. Weil.
17. Mac. text.
18. Torrens.
19. Payne.
20. Payne's Tales from the Arabic (marked I. II. III.)
21. Calc.
22. Burton.

As nearly all editions of The Nights are in several volumes, the
volumes are indicated throughout, except in the case of some of
the texts. Only those tales in No. 5, not included in No. 4, are
here indicated in the same column. All tales which there is good
reason to believe do not belong to the genuine Nights are marked
with an asterisk.

The blank column may be used to enter the contents of some other
edition.
                                                        | Galland.                          |"Bul." Text.                      Burton.
                                                        |   |Caussin de Perceval.           |   |Lane.                              |
                                                        |   |   |Gauttier.                  |   |   |"Bres." Text.                  |
                                                        |   |   |   |Scott's MS.            |   |   |   |Habicht.                   |
                                                        |   |   |   |   |Scott.             |   |   |   |   |Weil.                  |
                                                        |   |   |   |   |   |Von Hammer's MS.   |   |   |   |   |"Mac." Text        |
                                                        |   |   |   |   |   |   |Zinserling.|   |   |   |   |   |   |Torrens.       |
                                                        |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |Lamb.  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |Payne.     |
                                                        |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |Trébutien  |   |   |   |   |   |   |Calc.  |
                                                       [| 1.| 2.| 3.|4,5|6,7| 8.| 9.|10.|11.|12.|13.|14.|15.|16.|17.|18.|19.|20.|   |22.]

   Introduction  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  | - |...|...| 1 | - |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + |...| 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
   Story of King Shahryar and his brother    .   .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      a. Tale of the Bull and the Ass    .   .   .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | A | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
   1. Tale of the Trader and the Jinni   .   .   .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      a. The First Shaykh's Story    .   .   .   .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      b. The Second Shaykh's Story   .   .   .   .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      c. The Third Shaykh's Story    .   .   .   .   .  | - | - |...| 1 | - |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | - |...|  1
   2. The Fisherman and the Jinni    .   .   .   .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      a. Tale of the Wazir and the Sage Duban    .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
         ab. Story of King Sindibad and his Falcon   .  | - | - |...| ? | - |VHa|...|...|...| + | - | - | - | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | - |...|  1
         ac. Tale of the Husband and the Parrot  .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | ? | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| - | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | - | - | - | + |...|  1
         ad. Tale of the Prince and the Ogress   .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | ? | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      b. Tale of the Ensorcelled Prince  .   .   .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
   3. The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad .   .  | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 2 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      a. The First Kalandar's Tale   .   .   .   .   .  | 2 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 2 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      b. The Second Kalandar's Tale  .   .   .   .   .  | 2 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 2 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
         ba. Tale of the Envier and the Envied   .   .  | 2 | 1 | 1 | ? | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| - | 1 | + | 2 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      c. The Third Kalandar's Tale   .   .   .   .   .  | 2 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 2 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      d. The Eldest Lady's Tale  .   .   .   .   .   .  | 2 | 2 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 2 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      e. Tale of the Portress    .   .   .   .   .   .  | 2 | 2 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 2 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | - |...|  1
      Conclusion of the Story of the Porter and
         three Ladies    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  | 2 | 2 | 1 | 1 | 1 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 2 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
   4. Tale of the Three Apples   .   .   .   .   .   .  | 3 | 2 | 2 |...| 2 |VHa|...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 3 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
   5. Tale of Nur Al-Din and his Son Badr Al-Din Hasan  |3,4| 2 | 2 |...| 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 3 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
   6. The Hunchback's Tale   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  | 4 | 2 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 3 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      a. The Nazarene Broker's Story .   .   .   .   .  | 4 | 2 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 3 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      b. The Reeve's Tale    .   .   .   .   .   .   .  | 4 | 2 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 3 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      c. Tale of the Jewish Doctor   .   .   .   .   .  | 4 | 3 | 2 | ? | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 3 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      d. Tale of the Tailor  .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |4,5| 3 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 3 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
      e. The Barber's Tale of Himself    .   .   .   .  | 5 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 4 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
         ea. The Barber's Tale of his First Brother  .  | 5 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 4 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
         eb. The Barber's Tale of his Second Brother .  | 5 | 3 | 2 | ? | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 4 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
         ec. The Barber's Tale of his Third Brother  .  | 5 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 4 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
         ed. The Barber's Tale of his Fourth Brother .  | 5 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 4 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
         ee. The Barber's Tale of his Fifth Brother  .  | 5 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 4 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
         ef. The Barber's Tale of his Sixth Brother  .  | 5 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 4 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
         The End of the Tailor's Tale.   .   .   .   .  | 5 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 2 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 4 | 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  1
   7. Nur Al-Din Ali and the Damsel Anis Al-Jalis    .  | 7 | 4 | 3 | 1 | 3 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + |5,6| 1 | + | 1 | 1 | + |...|  2
   8. Tale of Ghanim Bin Ayyub, the Distraught, the
         Thrall o' Love  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  | 8 |4,5| 4 |...| 4 | 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 | + | 8 | 2 | + | 1 | 1 |...|...|  2
      a. Tale of the First Eunuch, Bukhayt   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| ? |...|...|...| + |   | + |...| 2 | + | 1 | 1 |...|...|  2
      b. Tale of the Second Eunuch, Kafur.   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| ? |...|...|...| + | 1 | + |...| 2 | + | 1 | 1 |...|...|  2
   9. Tale of King Omar Bin Al-Nu'uman, and his
         sons Sharrkan and Zan Al-Makan  .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 1 |...|...|...| + | - |...|...| 3 | + |1(p)|2 |...|...|2,3
      a. Tale of Taj Al-Muluk and the Princess Dunya .  |...|...|...|...|...| 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 |...|...| 3 | + |...| 2 |...|...|2,3
         aa. Tale of Aziz and Azizah .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 1 |...|...|...| + | 1 |...|...| 3 | + |...| 2 |...|...|2,3
      b. Tale of the Hashish-Eater   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| ? |...|...|...| + | - |...|...| - | + |...| 2 |...|...|  3
      c. Tale of Hammad the Badawi   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 1 |...|...|...| + | - |...|...| - | + |...| 2 |...|...|  3
  10. The Birds and Beasts and the Carpenter .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | 2 |...|...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  11. The Hermits    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  12. The Water-fowl and the Tortoise    .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  13. The Wolf and the Fox   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
      a. Tale of the Falcon and the Partridge    .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  14. The Mouse and the Ichneumon    .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  15. The Cat and the Crow   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  16. The Fox and the Crow   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
      a. The Flea and the Mouse  .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
      b. The Saker and the Birds .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
      c. The Sparrow and the Eagle   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  17. The Hedgehog and the Wood Pigeons  .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
      a. The Merchant and the Two Sharpers   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  18. The Thief and his Monkey   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
      a. The Foolish Weaver  .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  19. The Sparrow and the Peacock    .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHb|...|...|...| + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 3 |...|...|  3
  20. Ali Bin Bakkar and Shams Al-Nahar  .   .   .   .  |5,6| 3 | 3 |...|2,3| 1 |...|...|...| + | 2 | + | 4 | 1 | + |...| 3 | + |...|  3
  21. Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman .   .   .   .   .   .   .  | 6 |3,4| 3 | 2 | 3 |1,2|...|...|...| + | 2 | + | 5 | 1 | + |...| 3 |...|...|3,4
      a. Ni'amah bin Al-Rabia and Naomi his Slave-girl  |...| 9 |...|...|...| ? |...|...|...| + | 2 | + | 13| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  22. Ala Al-Din Abu Al-Shamat   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...| 9 |...|...|...| 2 |...|...|...| + | 2 | + | 13| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  23. Hatim of the Tribe of Tayy .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  24. Ma'an the son of Zaidah and the three Girls    .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 |...| 2 | + |...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  25. Ma'an son of Zaidah and the Badawi .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  26. The City of Labtayt    .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  27. The Caliph Hisham and the Arab Youth   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  28. Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi and the Barber-Surgeon    .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  29. The City of Many-columned Iram and Abdullah
         son of Abi Kalabah  .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  30. Isaac of Mosul     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...| 7 |...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + | 13| 2 | + |...| 3 | + |...|  4
  31. The Sweep and the Noble Lady   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  32. The Mock Caliph    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...| 9 | 2 |...|...| 2 | - |...| - | + | 2 | + | 4 | 2 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  33. Ali the Persian    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 3 |...|...|  4
  34. Harun Al-Rashid and the Slave-Girl and the
         Imam Abu Yusuf  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | - | + |...| 2 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  35. The Lover who feigned himself a Thief  .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 2 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  36. Ja'afar the Barmecide and the Bean-Seller  .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | - |...| - | + | 2 |...|...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  37. Abu Mohammed hight Lazybones   .   .   .   .   .  |...| 9 |...|...|...| 2 | - |...| - | + | 2 | + | 13| 2 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  38. Generous dealing of Yahya bin Khalid the
         Barmecide with Mansur   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| ? | - |...| - | + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  39. Generous Dealing of Yahya son of Khalid with
         a man who forged a letter in his name   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| ? | - |...| - | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  40. Caliph Al-Maamun and the Strange Scholar   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...|...|...|...| 4 |...|...|  4
  41. Ali Shar and Zumurrud  .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 1 | + | 2 | + |...| 2 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  42. The Loves of Jubayr Bin Umayr and the Lady Budur  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 1 | + | 2 | + |...| 2 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  43. The Man of Al-Yaman and his six Slave-Girls    .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...| 2 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  44. Harun Al-Rashid and the Damsel and Abu Nowas   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...| 2 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  45. The Man who stole the dish of gold whereon
         the dog ate .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  46. The Sharper of Alexandria and the Chief of Police |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  47. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and the three Chiefs of Police  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
      a. Story of the Chief of the new Cairo Police  .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
      b. Story of the Chief of the Bulak Police   .  .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
      c. Story of the Chief of the Old Cairo Police  .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  48. The Thief and the Shroff   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  49. The Chief of the Kus Police and the Sharper    .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  50. Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi and the Merchant's Sister .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  51. The Woman whose hands were cut off for alms-
         giving  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  52. The devout Israelite   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  53. Abu Hassan Al-Ziyadi and the Khorasan Man  .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  54. The Poor Man and his Friend in Need    .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  55. The Ruined Man who became rich again through
         a dream .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  56. Caliph Al-Mutawakkil and his Concubine Mahbubah   |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  57. Wardan the Butcher's Adventure with the Lady
         and the Bear    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  58. The King's Daughter and the Ape    .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  4
  59. The Ebony Horse    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  | 11| 7 | 5 |...| 5 | 2 | - |...| - | + | 2 | + | 9 | 1 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  60. Uns Al-Wujud and the Wazir's Daughter Rose-
         in-Hood .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...| 6 | 4 | 6 | 2 | 1 |...| 1 | + | 2 | + | 11| 2 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  61. Abu Nowas with the Three Boys and the Caliph
         Harun Al-Rashid .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| - | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  62. Abdullah bin Ma'amar with the Man of Bassorah
         and his Slave-Girl  .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  63. The Lovers of the Banu Ozrah   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | 2 | + | 11| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  64. The Wazir of Al-Yaman and his young Brother    .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  65. The Loves of the Boy and Girl at School    .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  66. Al-Mutalammis and his Wife Umaymah .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | - | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  67. Harun Al-Rashid and Zubaydah in the Bath   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  68. Harim Al-Rashid and the Three Poets    .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...| 2 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  69. Mus 'ab bin Al-Zubayr and Ayishah his Wife .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  70. Abu Al-Aswad and his Slave-Girl    .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...|...| + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  71. Harun Al-Rashid and the two Slave-Girls    .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  72. Harun Al-Rashid and the Three Slave-Girls  .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...|...| + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  73. The Miller and his Wife    .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  74. The Simpleton and the Sharper  .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  75. The Kazi Abu Yusuf with Harun Al-Rashid and
         Queen Zubaydah  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...| A | A | - | - |...| - | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  76. The Caliph Al-Hakim and the Merchant   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  77. King Kisra Anushirwan and the Village Damsel   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  78. The Water-carrier and the Goldsmith's Wife .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  79. Khusrau and Shirin and the Fisherman   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  80. Yahya bin Khalid and the Poor Man  .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  81. Mohammed al-Amin and the Slave-Girl    .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  82. The Sons of Yahya bin Khalid and Said bin Salim   |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  83. The Woman's Trick against her Husband  .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  84. The Devout Woman and the Two Wicked Elders .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  85. Ja'afar the Barmecide and the old Badawi   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  86. Omar bin Al-Khattab and the Young Badawi   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 | 1 | 3 | + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  87. Al-Maamun and the Pyramids of Eygpt    .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  88. The Thief and the Merchant .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  89. Masrur the Eunuch and Ibn Al-Karibi    .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  90. The Devotee Prince .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 | 3 | 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  91. The Schoolmaster who fell in Love by Report    .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  92. The Foolish Dominie    .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...|...| + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  93. The Illiterate who set up for a Schoolmaster   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  94. The King and the Virtuous Wife .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  95. Abd Al-Rahman the Maghribi's story of the Rukh .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  96. Adi bin Zayd and the Princess Hind .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  97. Di'ibil Al-Khuza'i with the Lady and Muslim bin
         Al-Walid    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  98. Isaac of Mosul and the Merchant    .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
  99. The Three Unfortunate Lovers   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 100. How Abu Hasan brake Wind   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| - | - |...| - | ? | - |...|...|...| ? |...| - |...|...|  5
 101. The Lovers of the Banu Tayy    .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 102. The Mad Lover  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 103. The Prior who became a Moslem  .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 | 2 | 3 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 104. The Loves of Abu Isa and Kurrat Al-Ayn .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 105. Al-Amin and his Uncle Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 106. Al-Fath bin Khakan and Al-Mutawakkil   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 107. The Man's dispute with Learned Woman concerning
         the relative excellence of male and female  .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 108. Abu Suwayd and the pretty Old Woman    .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 109. Ali bin Tahir and the girl Muunis  .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 110. The Woman who had a Boy, and the other who had
         a Man to lover  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 111. Ali the Cairene and the Haunted House in Baghdad  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 1 | + | 2 | + |...| 4 | + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 112. The Pilgrim Man and the Old Woman  .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 113. Abu Al-Husn and his Slave-girl Tawaddud    .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 1 | + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 4 |...|...|  5
 114. The Angel of Death with the Proud King and the
         Devout Man  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 115. The Angel of Death and the Rich King   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 116. The Angel of Death and the King of the Children
         of Israel   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 | 3 | 3 | + | 2 |...|...|...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 117. Iskandar zu Al-Karnayn and a certain Tribe of
         Poor Folk   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 118. The Righteousness of King Anushirwan   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 119. The Jewish Kazi and his Pious Wife .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 120. The Shipwrecked Woman and her Child    .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 121. The Pious Black Slave  .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 122. The Devout Tray-maker and his Wife .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 123. Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf and the Pious Man  .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 124. The Blacksmith who could Handle Fire Without Hurt |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 125. The Devotee to whom Allah gave a Cloud for
         Service and the Devout King .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 126. The Moslem Champion and the Christian Damsel   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 127. The Christian King's Daughter and the Moslem   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 128. The Prophet and the Justice of Providence  .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | 2 |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 129. The Ferryman of the Nile and the Hermit    .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| - | + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 130. The Island King and the Pious Israelite    .   .  |...|...| 6 |...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...| 10| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 131. Abu Al-Hasan and Abu Ja'afar the Leper .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 |...| 3 | + | - |...|...|...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 132. The Queen of the Serpents  .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 | 3 | 1 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
      a. The Adventure of Bulukiya   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 | 3 | 1 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
      b. The Story of Janshah    .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 2 | 1 | 3 | 1 | + | - |...|...| 4 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  5
 133. Sindbad the Seaman and Sindbad the Landsman    .  | 3 | 2 | 2 |...| 2 | 3 | - |...| - | + | 3 | + | 2 | 1 | + |...| 5 | + |...|  6
      a. The First Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman  .   .  | 3 | 2 | 2 |...| 2 | 3 | - |...| - | + | 3 | + | 2 | 1 | + |...| 5 | + |...|  6
      b. The Second Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman .   .  | 3 | 2 | 2 |...| 2 | 3 | - |...| - | + | 3 | + | 2 | 1 | + |...| 5 | + |...|  6
      c. The Third Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman  .   .  | 3 | 2 | 2 |...| 2 | 3 | - |...| - | + | 3 | + | 2 | 1 | + |...| 5 | + |...|  6
      d. The Fourth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman .   .  | 3 | 2 | 2 |...| 2 | 3 | - |...| - | + | 3 | + | 2 | 1 | + |...| 5 | + |...|  6
      e. The Fifth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman  .   .  | 3 | 2 | 2 |...| 2 | 3 | - |...| - | + | 3 | + | 3 | 1 | + |...| 5 | + |...|  6
      f. The Sixth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman  .   .  | 3 | 2 | 2 |...| 2 | 3 | - |...| - | + | 3 | + | 3 | 1 | + |...| 5 | - |...|  6
      ff. The Sixth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|...|...|...|...| - | 3 | - |...|...| - |...|III| + |...|  -
      g. The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman    .  | 3 | 2 | 2 |...| 2 | 3 | - |...| - | + | 3 | + | 3 | 1 | + |...| 5 | + |...|  6
      gg. The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman   .  | - |...|...|...| - | - | - |...| - | - | 3 | - |...| - | - |...|III| + |...|  6
 134. The City of Brass  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...| 3 | 2 | 1 | 1 | + | 3 | + |...| 2 | + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
 135. The Craft and Malice of Women: .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...| A | A | 3 | - |...| - | + | 3 | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      a. The King and his Wazir's Wife   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...| A | A |...| - |...| - | + | 3 | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      b. The Confectioner, his Wife and the Parrot   .  |...|...|...| A | A |VHc| - |...| - | + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      c. The Fuller and his Son  .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...| A | A |VHc|...|...|...| + | - | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      d. The Rake's Trick against the Chaste Wife    .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHc|...|...|...| + | - | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      e. The Miser and the Loaves of Bread   .   .   .  |...|...|...|...|...|VHc|...|...|...| + | - | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      f. The Lady and her two Lovers .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...| A | A |VHc|...|...|...| + | 3 | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      g. The King's Son and the Ogress   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...| A | A |VHc|...|...|...| + | - | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      h. The Drop of Honey   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...| A | A |VHc|...|...|...| + | 3 | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      i. The Woman who made her husband sift dust    .  |...|...|...| A |...|VHc|...|...|...| + | 3 | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      j. The Enchanted Spring    .   .   .   .   .   .  |...|...|...| A | A |VHc|...|...|...| + | 3 | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      k. The Wazir's Son and the Hammam-keeper's Wife   |...|...|...| A |...|...|...|...|...| + | - | + |...|...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      l. The Wife's device to cheat her Husband  .   .  |...|...|...| A | A |...|...|...|...| + | 3 | + |15 |...| + |...| 5 |...|...|  6
      m. 