hip after him, so
that civil war was like to befal them. However, the men of
judgment and the folk of understanding and the people of
experience directed them to crown the youth who had lost his
brother, for that they still held Salma to be a man. They
consented to this one and all; and, betaking themselves to her,
offered the kingship.[FN#537] She refused, but they were urgent
with her, till she consented, saying within herself, "My sole
desire in the kingship is to find my brother." Then they seated
her upon the throne of the realm and set the crown upon her head,
after which she undertook the business of governance and
ordinance of affairs; and they rejoiced in her with the utmost
joy. On such wise fared it with her; but as for Salim he abode
with the Cook a whole year's space, bringing him two dinars a
day; and when his affair waxed longsome, the man felt for him and
pitied him. Presently he promised him release on condition that,
if he let him go, he should not discover his illdeeds to the
Sultan; for that it was his wont now and then to entrap a man and
carry him to his house and slay him and take his money and cook
his flesh and give it to the folk to eat.[FN#538] So he asked
him, "O youth, wilt thou that I release thee from this thy
misery, on condition that thou be reasonable and never discover
aught of thine affair?" Salim answered, "I will swear to thee by
whatsoever oath thou wilt administer that I will keep thy secret
and will not speak one syllable anent thee, what while l am in
the land of the living." Quoth the Kitchener, "I purpose to send
thee forth with my brother and cause thee voyage with him over
the sea, on condition that thou be to him a Mameluke, a boughten
slave; and when he cometh to the land of Hind, he shall sell thee
and thus wilt thou be delivered from prison and slaughter." And
quoth Salim, "'Tis well: be it as thou sayst, may Allah the Most
High requite thee with weal!" Accordingly the Cook equipped his
brother and freighting him a craft, stowed therein a cargaison of
merchandise. Then he committed Salim to him and they set out with
the ship. The Lord decreed them safety, so that they arrived at
the first city of Hind, which is known as AlMansurah,[FN#539] and
cast anchor there. Now the king of that city had died, leaving a
daughter and a widow who, being the quickest-witted of women and
cleverest of the folk of her day, gave out that the girl was a
boy, so that the kingship might be established unto them. The
troops and the Emirs gave credit that the case was as she
avouched and that the Princess was a Prince; wherefore they
obeyed her bidding and the Queenmother took order for the matter
and used to dress the girl in man's habit and seat her on the
throne of the kingship, so that the Lords of the land and the
chief officers of the realm used to go in to her and salute her
and do her service and depart, nothing doubting but she was a
boy. After this fashion they fared for months and years and the
Queen-mother ceased not to do thus till the Cook's brother came
to the town in his ship, and with him Salim. He landed with the
youth and displayed him for sale to the Queen who, when she saw
him, prognosticated well of him; presently she bought him and was
kind to him and entreated him with honour. Then began she to
prove him in his moral parts and make assay of him in his
affairs, and she found in him all that is in kings' sons of
understanding and fine breeding and good manners and qualities.
Thereupon she sent for him in private and said to him, "I am
minded to do thee a service, so thou canst keep a
secret."[FN#540] He promised her all that she desired and she
discovered to him her mystery in the matter of her daughter,
saying, "I will marry thee to her and commit to thee the
governance and constitute thee king and ruler over this city." He
thanked her and promised to carry out all she should order him,
and she said to him, "Go forth to such-an-one of the neighbouring
provinces privily." So he went forth and on the morrow she made
ready loads and gear and gifts and bestowed on him abundant
substance, all of which they loaded on the backs of
baggage-camels. Then she gave out among the folk that the nephew
of the king, the son of his brother, was come and bade the
Grandees and troops go forth to meet him in a body: she also
decorated the city in his honour and the kettle-drums of good
tidings beat for him whilst all the king's household went out and
dismounting before him, escorted him into, and lodged him with
the Queen-mother in the palace. Then she bade the Headmen of the
state attend his assembly; so they obeyed and witnessed of his
breeding and good parts that which amazed them and made them
forget the breeding of the kings who had preceded him. When they
were grown to like him, the Queenmother began sending privily for
the Emirs and Councillors, one by one, and swearing them to
conceal her project; and when she was assured of their
discretion, she discovered to them that the king had left naught
save a daughter and that she had done this only that she might
continue the kingship in his family and that the rule should not
go forth from them; after which she informed them that she was
minded to marry her daughter with her nephew, the new-comer; and
that he should be the holder of the kingship. They approved her
proposal and when she had discovered the secret to the last of
them and assured herself of their aid, she published the news
abroad and threw off all concealment. Then she sent for the Kazis
and Assessors, who drew up the contract of marriage between Salim
and the Princess, and they lavished gifts upon the soldiery and
overwhelmed them with largesse. The bride was incontinently
carried in procession to the young man and the kingship was
established to him. They tarried after this fashion a whole year
when Salim said to the Queen-mother, "Know that my life is not
pleasing to me nor can I abide with you in content till I get me
tidings of my sister and learn how her affair hath ended and how
she hath fared after me. So I will go forth and be absent from
you a year's space; then will I return to you, Inshallah--an it
please God the Most High--and I win of this that which I hope."
Quoth she, "I will not trust to thy word, but will go with thee
and help thee to whatso thou wishest and further thee myself
therein." Then she took a ship and loaded it with all manner
things of price, goods and monies and the like. Furthermore, she
appointed one of the Wazirs, a man in whom she trusted for his
conduct and contrivance, to rule the realm, saying to him, "Abide
in governance a full year and ordain all thou needest." Presently
the Queenmother and her daughter and son-in-law Salim went down
to the ship and sailed on till they made the land of Makran.
Their arrival there befel at the last of the day; so they nighted
in their ship, and when the morn was near to dawn, the young king
landed, that he might go to the Hammam, and walked marketwards.
As he drew near the bath, the Cook met him on the way and knew
him; so he seized him and pinioning him straitly, carried him to
his house, where he clapped the old fetters on his feet and cast
him back into his former place of durance vile.[FN#541] Salim,
finding himself in that sorry condition and considering that
wherewith he was afflicted of tribulation and the reverses of his
fair fortune, in that he had been a king and was now returned to
fetters and prison and hunger, wept and groaned and lamented and
improvised these couplets,

"My God, no patience now can aid afford; * Strait is my breast, O
     Thou of Lords the Lord:
My God, who in resource like thine hath force? * And Thou, the
     Subtle, dost my case record."

On this wise fared it with Salim; but as regards his wife and her
mother, when she awoke in the morning and her husband returned
not to her with break of dawn, she forebode all manner of
calamity and, straightway arising, she despatched her servants
and all who were with her in quest of her spouse; but they
happened not on any trace of him nor could they hear aught of his
news. So she bethought herself concerning the case and plained
and wept and groaned and sighed and blamed Fortune the fickle,
bewailing the changes of Time and reciting these
couplets,[FN#542]

"God keep the days of love-delight! How passing sweet they were!
     * How joyous and how solaceful was life in them whilere!
Would he were not, who sundered us upon the parting-day! * How
     many a body hath he slain, how many a bone laid bare!
Sans fault of mine, my blood and tears he shed and beggared me *
     Of him I love yet for himself gained nought thereby
     whate'er."

When she had made an end of her verses, she considered her affair
and said within herself, "By Allah, all these things have betided
by the predestination of Almighty Allah and His decree and this
upon the forehead was written in lines." Then she landed and
walked on till she came to a spacious place, and an open, where
she asked of the folk and hired a house. Thither she transported
forthright all that was in the ship of goods and sending after
brokers, sold all that was with her. Presently she took part of
the price and began enquiring of the folk, so haply she might
scent out tidings of the lost one; and she addressed herself to
lavishing alms and preparing medicines for the sick, clothing the
naked and watering the dry ground[FN#543] of the forlorn. She
ceased not so doing a whole year, and little by little she sold
off her goods and gave charitable gifts to the sick and sorry;
whereby her report was bruited abroad in the city and the folk
abounded in her praise. All this while Salim lay in fetters and
strait prison, and melancholy gat hold of him by reason of that
whereinto he had fallen of this affliction. At last, when care
waxed on him and calamity grew longsome, he fell sick of a sore
sickness. Then the Kitchener, seeing his plight (and verily he
was like to sink for much suffering), loosed him from the fetters
and bringing him forth of the prison, committed him to an old
woman, who had a nose the bigness of a gugglet,[FN#544] and bade
her nurse him and medicine him and serve him and entreat him
kindly, so haply he might be made whole of that his sickness.
Accordingly the old woman took him and carrying him to her
lodging, began nursing him and giving him to eat and drink; and
when he was delivered of that torment, he recovered from the
malady which had afflicted him. Now the old woman had heard from
the folk of the lady who gave alms to the sick, and indeed the
news of her bounties reached both poor and rich; so she arose and
bringing out Salim to the door of her house, laid him upon a mat
and wrapped him in an Aba-gown and sat over against him.
Presently, it befel that the lady passed by them, and the old
woman seeing her rose to her and blessed her, saying, "O my
daughter, O thou to whom belong goodness and beneficence and
charity and almsdoing,[FN#545] know that this young man is a
foreigner, and indeed lack and lice and hunger and nakedness and
cold slay him." When the lady heard this, she gave her alms and
presented her with a part of that which was with her; and indeed
her charitable heart inclined to Salim, but she knew him not for
her spouse. The old woman received the alms from her and carrying
it to Salim, took part for herself and with the rest bought him
an old shirt,[FN#546] in which she clad him, after she had
stripped him of that he had on. Then she threw away the frock she
had taken from off him and arising forthwith, washed his body of
that which was thereon of grime and scented him with somewhat of
scent. She also bought chickens and made him broth; so he ate and
his life returned to him and he abode with her in all comfort of
condition till the morrow. Next morning the old woman said to
Salim, "When the lady cometh to thee, arise and buss her hand and
say to her, 'I am a homeless man and indeed cold and hunger kill
me;' so haply she may give thee somewhat that thou mayest expend
upon thy case." And he answered, "To hear is to obey." Then she
took him by the hand and carrying him without her house, seated
him at the door; and as he sat, behold, the lady came up to him,
whereupon the old woman rose to her and Salim kissed her hand
and, looking at her the while, blessed her. But when he saw her,
he knew her for his wife; so he shrieked and shed tears and
groaned and plained, at which she came up to him and threw
herself upon him; for indeed she knew him with all knowledge,
even as he knew her. So she hung to him and embraced him and
called to her serving-men and attendants and those who were about
her; and they took him up and carried him forth of that stead.
When the old woman saw this, she cried out to the Cook within the
house, and he said to her, "Fare thou before me." So she forewent
him and he ran after her and ceased not running till he overtook
the party and seizing Salim, exclaimed "What aileth you to take
my slave-lad?" Whereupon the Queen cried out at him, saying,
"Know that this is my husband, whom I had lost;" and Salim also
cried out, saying, "Mercy! Mercy! I appeal to Allah and to the
Sultan against this Satan!" Therewith a world of folk straightway
gathered together and loud rose the cries and the clamours
between them; but the most part of them said, "Carry their case
up to the Sultan." So they referred the matter to the king, who
was none other than Salim's sister Salma. Then they repaired to
the palace and the dragoman went in to Salma and said to her, "O
king of the age, here is a Hindi woman, who cometh from the land
of Hind, and she hath laid hands on a servant, a young man,
claiming him as her husband, who hath been lost to her these two
years, and she journeyed not hither save for his sake, and in
very sooth these many days she hath done almsdeeds in thy city.
And here is a fellow, a Kitchener, who declareth that the young
man is his slave."[FN#547] When the Queen heard these words, her
vitals quivered and she groaned from a grieving heart and called
to mind her brother and that which had betided him. Then she bade
those around her bring them between her hands, and when she saw
them, she knew her brother and was about to cry aloud; but her
reason restrained her; yet she could not prevent herself rising
up and sitting down.[FN#548] At last, however, she enforced her
soul to patience and said to them, "Let each and every of you
acquaint me with his case." So Salim came forward and kissing
ground before the king, lauded him and related to him his story
from first to last, until the time of their coming to that city,
he and his sister, telling him how he had entered the place and
had fallen into the hands of the Cook and that which had betided
him and whatso he had suffered from him of beating and collars,
of fetters and pinioning, till the man had made him his brother's
Mameluke, a boughten slave, and how the brother had sold him in
Hind and he had become king by marrying the Princess: and how
life was not lovesome to him till he should foregather with his
sister and now the same Cook bad fallen in with him a second time
and had pinioned and fettered him. Brief, he acquainted her with
that which had betided him of sickness and sorrow for the space
of a whole year. When he had made an end of his speech, his wife
straightways came forward and told her story, from incept to
termination, how her mother bought him[FN#549] from the Cook's
partner and the people of the kingdom came under his rule; nor
did she cease telling till she came, in her history, to that city
and acquainted the king with the manner of her meeting her
husband. When she had made an end of her adventure, the Kitchener
exclaimed, "Alack, what befals us from lying rascals. By Allah, O
king, this woman lieth against me, for this youth is my
rearling[FN#550] and he was born of one of my slave-girls. He
fled from me and I found him again." When the Queen heard the
last of the talk, she said to the Cook, "The decree between you
shall not be save in accordance with justice." Then she dismissed
all those who were present and turning to her brother, said to
him, "Indeed thy truth is stablished with me and the sooth of thy
speech, and praised be Allah who hath brought about reunion
between thee and thy wife! So now begone with her to thy country
and cease to seek thy sister Salma and depart in peace." But,
hearing this, Salim replied, "By Allah, by the might of the
All-knowing King, I will not turn back from seeking my sister
till I die or I find her, Inshallah!" Then he called his sister
to mind and improvised from a heart disappointed, troubled,
afflicted these couplets,

"O thou who blam'st me for my heart, in anger twitting me, *
     Hadst tasted what my heart did taste, thou wouldst be
     pitying me!
By Allah, O my chider for my sister leave, ah! leave * My heart
     to moan its grief and feel the woes befitting me.
Indeed I grew to hold her dear privily, publicly; * And in my
     bosom bides a pang at no time quitting me;
And in my vitals burns a flame that ne'er was equalled by * The
     fire of hell and blazeth high to Death committing me."

Now when his sister Salma heard what he said, she could no longer
restrain her soul, but threw herself upon him and discovered to
him her case. When he knew her, he threw himself upon her
swooning awhile; after which he came to himself and cried,
"Lauded be the Lord, the Bountiful, the Beneficent!" Then they
plained each to other of that they had suffered from the pangs of
parting, whilst Salim's wife wondered at this and Salma's
patience and endurance pleased her. So she saluted her with the
Salam, and thanked her for her fair boons, saying, "By Allah, O
my lady, all that we are in of gladness never befel us save by
thy blessing; so praised be Allah who deigned vouchsafe us thy
sight!" Then they tarried all three, Salma, Salim and his wife,
in joy and happiness and delight three days, veiled from the
folk; and it was bruited abroad in the city that the king had
found his brother, who was lost for many a year, and had saved
him from the Cook's house. On the fourth day, all the troops and
the lieges assembled together to see the King and standing at his
gate, craved leave to enter. Salma bade admit them; so they
entered and paid her royal suit and service and gave her joy of
her brother's safe return. She bade them do homage to Salim, and
they consented and sware fealty to him; after which they kept
silence awhile, so they might hear what the king should command.
Then quoth Salma, "Ho, ye gathering of soldiers and subjects, ye
wot that ye forced me willy-nilly to accept the kingship and
besought me thereof and I consented to your desires anent my
being raised to rule over you; and I did this against my will;
for I would have you know that I am a woman and that I disguised
myself and donned man's dress, so peradventure my case might be
concealed when I lost my brother. But now Allah hath deigned
reunite me with my brother, and it is no longer lawful to me that
I be king and Sultan over the people, and I a woman; because
there is no Sultanate for women, whenas men are present.[FN#551]
For this reason, an it suit you, set my brother on the throne of
the kingdom, for this is he; and I will busy myself with the
worship of Allah the Most High and thanksgiving to Him for my
reunion with my brother. Or, an ye prefer it, take your kingship
and make whom ye will ruler and liege lord thereof." Upon this
the folk all cried out, saying, "We accept him to king over us;"
and they did him suit and service and gave him joy of the
kingship. So the preachers preached the sermon[FN#552] in his
name and the court-poets praised him; and he lavished largesse
upon the soldiery and the suite and overwhelmed them with favours
and bounties and was prodigal to the Ryots of justice and equity,
with goodly policy and polity. When he had effected this much of
his affect, he caused bring forth the Cook and his household to
the divan, but spared the old woman who had nursed him, because
she had been the cause of his deliverance. Then all assembled
without the town and he tormented the Cook and those who were
with him with all manner torments, after which he did him to die
by the foulest of deaths[FN#553] and burning him with fire,
scattered his ashes far and wide in the air. After this Salim
abode in the governance, invested with the Sultanate, and ruled
the people a whole year, when he returned to Al-Mansurah and
sojourned there another year. And he and his wife ceased not to
go from city to city and tarry in this a year and that a year,
till he was vouchsafed children and they grew up, whereupon he
appointed him of his sons, who was found fitting, to be his
deputy in one kingdom and he ruled in the other; and he lived, he
and his wife and children, what while Almighty Allah
willed.[FN#554] "Nor" (continued the Wazir), "O King of the age,
is this story rarer or stranger than the King of Hind and his
wronged and envied Minister." When the King heard this, his mind
was occupied,[FN#555] and he bade the Wazir hie to his own house.

         The Twenty-eighth and Last Night of the Month.

When the evening evened, the King summoned the Minister and bade
him tell the story of the King of Hind and his Wazir. So he said,
"Hearkening and obedience. Give ear, O auspicious King, to




The Tale of the King of Hind and his Wazir.



There was once in the Hind-land a king illustrious of worth,
endowed with understanding and policy, and his name was Shah
Bakht. He had a Minister, a godly man and a sagacious, right
prudent in rede, conformable to him in governance and just in
judgment; for which cause his enviers were many and many were the
hypocrites who sought faults in him and set snares for him, so
that they insinuated into King Shah Bakht's eyes hatred against
him and sowed in his heart despite towards him; and plot followed
plot, and their rancour waxed until the king was brought to
arrest him and lay him in jail and to confiscate his wealth and
degrade him from his degree. When they knew that there was left
him no possession for which the king might lust, they feared lest
the sovran release him, by the influence of the Wazir's good
counsel upon the king's heart, and he return to his former case,
so should their machinations be marred and their degrees
degraded, for that they knew that the king would heed whatso he
had known from that man nor would forget aught wherewith he was
familiar in him. Now it came to pass that a certain person of
perverted belief[FN#556] found a way to the adorning of falsehood
with a semblance of fair-seeming and there proceeded from him
that whereby the hearts of the folk were occupied, and their
minds were corrupted by his lying tales; for that he made use of
Indian quiddities[FN#557] and forged them into proof for the
denial of the Maker the Creator, extolled be His might and
exalted be He and glorified and magnified above the speech of the
deniers. He avouched that it is the planets which order all
worldly affairs and he set down twelve mansions[FN#558] to twelve
Zodiacal signs and made each sign thirty degrees,[FN#559] after
the number of the days of the month, so that in twelve mansions
there are three hundred and sixty, after the number of the days
of the year; and he wrought a work, wherein he lied and was an
infidel and denied the Deity, be He for ever blessed! Then he
laid hold of the king's heart and the enviers and haters aided
him against the Minister and won the royal favour and corrupted
his intent against the Wazir, so that he got of him that which he
got and at last his lord banished him and thrust him away. By
such means the wicked man obtained that which he sought of the
Minister and the case was prolonged till the affairs of the
kingdom became disordered, by dint of ill government, and the
most part of the king's reign fell off from him and he came nigh
unto ruin. On this wise he was assured of the loyalty of his
whilome, sagacious Wazir and the excellence of his ordinance and
the rectitude of his rede. So he sent after him and brought him
and the wicked man before him and summoning to his presence the
Lords of his land and the Chiefs of his chieftainship, gave them
leave to talk and dispute and forbade the wicked man from his
perverted belief. [FN#560] Then arose that wise Minister and
skilful and praised Allah Almighty and lauded Him and glorified
Him and hallowed Him and attested His unity and disputed with the
miscreant and overcame him and silenced him; nor did he cease
from him till he compelled him to make confession of repentance
from that which he had misbelieved. Therewith King Shah Bakht
rejoiced with exceeding great joy and cried, "Praise be to the
Lord who hath saved me from this man and hath preserved me from
the loss of my kingship and my prosperity!" So the affair of the
Wazir returned to order and stablishment and the king restored
him to his place and raised him to higher rank. Lastly, he
assembled the folk who had striven against him and destroyed them
all, to the last man. "And how like" (continued the Wazir), "is
this story to that of myself and King Shah Bakht, with regard to
that which befel me of the changing of the King and his crediting
others against me; but now is the fairness of my fashion
fulfilled in thine eyes, for that Allah Almighty hath inspired
thee with wisdom and endowed thee with longanimity and patience
to hear from me whatso He allotted to those who forewent us, till
He hath shown forth my innocence and made manifest unto thee the
truth. For lo and behold! the days are now past, wherein it was
declared to the king that I should labour for the loss of my
soul,[FN#561] that is within the month; and lookye, the
probation-time is gone by, and past is the season of evil and it
hath ceased by the protection of the King and his good fortune."
Then he bowed his head and was silent. When King Shah Bakht heard
his Wazir's speech, he was abashed before him and confounded, and
he marvelled at the gravity of his intellect and his
long-suffering. So he sprang up to him and embraced him and the
Minister kissed his feet. Then the King called for a costly robe
of honour and cast it over Al-Rahwan and honoured him with the
highmost honour and showed him especial favour and restored him
to his degree and Wazirate. Furthermore he imprisoned those who
had devised his destruction with lies and leasing and gave him
full leave and license to pass judgment upon the Interpreter who
had expounded to him the dream. So the Wazir abode in the
ordering of the realm until Death came to them; "And this" (added
Shahrazad) "is all, O king of the age, that hath come down to us
of King Shah Bakht and his Wazir."




                    SHAHRAZAD AND SHAHRYAR.



As for King Shahryar, he wondered at Shahrazad with the utmost
wonder and drew her near to his heart of his abounding affection
for her; and she was magnified in his eyes and he said within
himself, "By Allah, the like of this is not deserving of
slaughter, for indeed the time favoureth us not with her equal.
By the Almighty, I have been reckless of mine affair, and had not
the Lord overcome me with His ruth and put his one at my service
so she might recount to me instances manifest and cases truthful
and admonitions goodly and traits edifying, such as should
restore me to the right road, I had come to ruin!  Wherefore to
Allah be the praise here for and I beseech the Most High to make
my end with her like that of the Wazir and Shah Bakht."  Then
sleep overcame the king and glory be unto Him who sleepeth
not![FN#562]  When it was the Nine hundred and thirtieth Night,
Shahrazad said, "O king, there is present in my thought a tale
which treateth of women's trickery and wherein is a warning to
whoso will be warned and an admonishment to whoso will be
admonished and whoso hath sight and insight; but I fear lest the
hearing of this belittle me with the liege-lord and lower my
degree in his esteem; yet I hope that this will not be, because
'tis a rare tale.  Women are indeed mischief-makers; their craft
and their cunning may not be told nor may their wiles be known;
while men enjoy their company and are not instant to uphold them
in the right way, neither are they vigilant over them with all
vigilance, but relish their society and take whatso is winsome
and regard not that which is other than this.  Indeed, they are
like unto the crooked rib, which an thou go about to straighten,
thou distortest it, and which an thou persist in straightening,
thou breakest it,[FN#563] so it behoveth the wise man to be
silent concerning them."  Thereupon quoth Dinarzad, "O sister
mine, bring forth that which is with thee and that which is
present to thy mind of the story concerning the guile of women
and their wiles, and have no fear lest this lessen thee with the
king; for that women are, like jewels, of all kinds and colours.
When a gem falleth into the hand of an expert, he keepeth it for
himself and leaveth all beside it.  Eke he preferreth some of
them over others, and in this he is like the potter,[FN#564] who
filleth his liln with all the vessels he hath moulded and under
them kindleth his fire.  When the making is done and he taketh
out that which is in the kiln, he findeth no help for it but that
he must break some of them, whilst others are what the folk need
and whereof they make use, while yet others there are which
return to be as they were.  So fear thou not nor deem it a grave
matter to adduce that which thou knowest of the craft of women,
for that in this is profit for all folk."  Then said Shahrazad,
"Then relate, O king (but Allah alone knoweth the secret things)
the Tale of-





End of Volume 11






                   Arabian Nights, Volume 11
                           Footnotes



[FN#1]  Arab.  "Al-Naim wa al-Yakzan."  This excellent story is not
in the Mac. Or Bresl. Edits.; but is given in the Breslau Text,
iv. 134-189 (Nights cclxxii.-ccxci.).  It is familiar to readers
of the old "Arabian Nights Entertainments" as "Abou-Hassan or the
Sleeper Awakened;" and as yet it is the only one of the eleven
added by Galland whose original has been discovered in Arabic:
the learned Frenchman, however, supplied it with embellishments
more suo, and seems to have taken it from an original fuller than
our text as is shown by sundry poetical and other passages which
he apparently did not invent.  Lane (vol. ii. chap. 12), noting
that its chief and best portion is an historical anecdote related
as a fact, is inclined to think that it is not a genuine tale of
The Nights.  He finds it in Al-Ishaki who finished his history
about the close of Sultan Mustafa the Osmanli's reign, circa A.H.
1032 (= 1623), and he avails himself of this version as it is
"narrated in a simple and agreeable manner."  Mr. Payne remarks,
"The above title (Asleep and Awake) is of course intended to mark
the contrast between the everyday (or waking) hours of Aboulhusn
and his fantastic life in the Khalif's palace, supposed by him to
have passed in a dream;" I may add that amongst frolicsome
Eastern despots the adventure might often have happened and that
it might have given a hint to Cervantes.

[FN#2]  i.e., The Wag.  See vol. i. 311: the old version calls
him "the Debauchee."

[FN#3]  Arab. "Al-Fars"; a people famed for cleverness and
debauchery.  I cannot see why Lane omitted the Persian, unless he
had Persian friends at Cairo.

[FN#4]  i.e., the half he intended for spending-money.

[FN#5]  i.e., "men," a characteristic Arab idiom: here it applies
to the sons of all time.

[FN#6]  i.e., make much of thee.

[FN#7]  In Lane the Caliph is accompanied by "certain of his
domestics."

[FN#8]  Arab.  "Khubz Mutabbak," = bread baked in a platter,
instead of an oven, an earthen jar previously heated, to the
sides of which the scones or bannocks of dough are applied: "it
is lighter than oven-bread, especially if it be made thin and
leavened."  See Al-Shakuri, a medical writer quoted by Dozy.

[FN#9]  In other parts of The Nights Harun al-Rashid declines
wine-drinking.

[FN#10]  The 'Allamah (doctissimus) Sayce (p. 212, Comparative
Philology, London, Trubner, 1885) goes far back for Khalifah = a
deputy, a successor.  He begins with the Semitic (Hebrew?) root
"Khaliph" = to change, exchange: hence "Khaleph" = agio.  From
this the Greeks got their {Greek} and Cicero his "Collybus," a
money-lender.

[FN#11]  Arab.  "Harfush" (in Bresl. Edit. iv. 138, "Kharfush"),
in popular parlance a "blackguard."  I have to thank Mr.
Alexander J. Cotheal, of New York, for sending me a MS. Copy of
this tale.

[FN#12]  Arab.  "Ta'am," in Egypt and Somaliland = millet seed
(Holcus Sorghum) cooked in various ways.  In Barbary it is
applied to the local staff of life, Kuskusu, wheaten or other
flour damped and granulated by hand to the size of peppercorns,
and lastly steamed (as we steam potatoes), the cullender-pot
being placed over a long-necked jar full of boiling water.  It is
served with clarified butter, shredded onions and meat; and it
represents the Risotto of Northern Italy.  Europeans generally
find it too greasy for digestion.  This Barbary staff of life is
of old date and is thus mentioned by Leo Africanus in early sixth
century.  "It is made of a lump of Dow, first set upon the fire,
in a vessel full of holes and afterwards tempered with Butter and
Pottage."  So says good Master John Pory, "A Geographical
Historie of Africa, by John Leo, a Moor," London, 1600, impensis
George Bishop.

[FN#13]  Arab.  "Bi al-Salam" (pron. "Bissalam") = in the Peace
(of Allah).

[FN#14]  And would bring him bad luck if allowed to go without
paying.

[FN#15]  i.e., of the first half, as has been shown.

[FN#16]  Arab.  "Kumajah" from the Persian Kumash = bread
unleavened and baked in ashes.  Egyptians use the word for
bannocks of fine flour.

[FN#17]  Arab.  "Kali," our "alcali" ; for this and other
abstergents see vol. i. 279.

[FN#18]  These lines have occurred twice in vol. i. 117 (Night
xii.); I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#19]  Arab.  "Ya 'llah, ya 'llah;" vulg. Used for "Look
sharp!" e.g., "Ya 'llah jari, ya walad" = Be off at once, boy."

[FN#20]  Arab.  "Banj akritashi," a term which has occurred
before.

[FN#21]  A natural clock, called West Africans Cokkerapeek =
Cock-speak.  All the world over it is the subject of
superstition: see Giles's "Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio"
(i. 177), where Miss Li, who is a devil, hears a cock crow and
vanishes.

[FN#22]  In Lane Al-Rashid "found at the door his young men
waiting for him and ordered them to convey Abu-l-Hasan upon a
mule and returned to the palace; Abu-l-Hasan being intoxicated
and insensible.  And when the Khaleefah had rested himself in the
palace, he called for," etc.

[FN#23]  Arab.  "Kursi," Assyrian "Kussu" = throne; and "Korsai"
in Aramaic (or Nabathean as Al-Mas'udi calls it), the second
growth-period of the "Semitic" family, which supplanted Assyrian
and Babylonian, and became, as Arabic now is, the common speech
of the "Semitic" world.

[FN#24]  Arab.  "Makan mahjub," which Lane renders by "a private
closet," and Payne by a "privy place," suggesting that the Caliph
slept in a numero cent.  So, when starting for the "Trakki
Campaign," Sir Charles Napier (of Sind), in his zeal for
lightening officers' baggage, inadvertently chose a water-closet
tent for his head-quarters--magno cum risu not of the staff, who
had a strange fear of him, but of the multitude who had not.

[FN#25]  Arab.  "Dar al-Salam," one of the seven "Gardens" into
which the Mohammedan Paradise is divided.  Man's fabled happiness
began in a Garden (Eden) and the suggestion came naturally that
it would continue there.  For the seven Heavens, see vol. viii.,
111.

[FN#26]  Branch of Pearl, see vol. ii. 57.

[FN#27]  Arab.  "Kahbah," the lowest word (vol. i. 70),
effectively used in contrast with the speaker's surroundings.

[FN#28]  Arab.  "Ya kabiri," =  mon brave, my good man.

[FN#29]  This exaggeration has now become familiar to English
poets.

[FN#30]  Like an Eastern he goes to the water-closet the first
thing in the morning, or rather dawn, and then washes
ceremonially before saying the first prayer.  In Europe he would
probably wait until after breakfast.  See vol. iii. 242.

[FN#31]  I have explained why an Eastern does not wash in the
basin as Europeans do in vol. i. p. 241.

[FN#32]  i.e., He was confused that he forgot.  All Moslems know
how to pray, whether they pray or not.

[FN#33]  The dawn-prayer consists of only four inclinations
(raka'at); two "Farz" (divinely appointed), and two Sunnah (the
custom of the Apostle).  For the Raka'ah see Lane, M.E. chapt.
iii.; it cannot be explained without illustrations.

[FN#34]  After both sets of prayers, Farz and Sunnah, the Moslem
looks over his right shoulder and says, "The Peace (of Allah) be
upon you and the ruth of Allah," and repeats the words over the
left shoulder. The salutation is addressed to the Guardian Angels
or to the bystanders (Moslems), who, however, do not return it.

[FN#35]  i.e., Ibrahim of Mosul the musician.  See vol. iv. 108.

[FN#36]  Arab.  "Liyuth" plur. of "layth," a lion: here warriors
are meant.

[FN#37]  The Abbasides traced their descent from Al-Abbas,
Mohammed's uncle, and justly held themselves as belonging to the
family of the Prophet.  See vol. ii. 61.

[FN#38]  Arab. "Nimshah" = "half-sword."  See vol. ii. p. 193.

[FN#39]  i.e., May thy dwelling-place never fall into ruin.  The
prayer has, strange to say, been granted. "The present city on
the eastern bank of the Tigris was built by Haroun al-Rashid, and
his house still stands there and is an object of reverent
curiosity."  So says my friend Mr. Grattan Geary (vol. i. p. 212,
"Through Asiatic Turkey," London: Low, 1878).  He also gives a
sketch of Zubaydah's tomb on the western bank of the Tigris near
the suburb which represents old Baghdad; it is a pineapple dome
springing from an octagon, both of brick once revetted with white
stucco.

[FN#40]  In the Bresl. Edit. four hundred.  I prefer the
exaggerated total.

[FN#41]  i.e., the raised recess at the upper end of an Oriental
saloon, and the place of honour, which Lane calls by its Egyptian
name "Liwan."  See his vol. i. 312 and his M.E. chapt. i.: also
my vol. iv. p. 71.

[FN#42]  "Bit o'Musk."

[FN#43]  "A gin," a snare.

[FN#44]  "A gift," a present.  It is instructive to compare Abu
al-Hasan with Sancho Panza, sprightly Arab wit with grave Spanish
humour.

[FN#45]  i.e., he fell down senseless.  The old version has "his
head knocked against his knees."

[FN#46]  Arab.  "Waddi" vulg. Egyptian and Syrian for the
classical "Addi" (ii. of Adu = preparing to do).  No wonder that
Lane complains (iii. 376) of the vulgar style, abounding in
errors."

[FN#47]  O Apple, O Repose o' Hearts, O Musk, O Choice Gift.

[FN#48]  Arab.  "Doghri," a pure Turkish word, in Egypt meaning
"truly, with truth," straightforwardly; in Syria = straight
(going), directly.

[FN#49]  Arab.  "Maristan," see vol. i. 288.

[FN#50]  The scene is a rechauffe of Badr al-Din Hasan and his
wife, i. 247.

[FN#51]  Arab.  "Janzir," another atrocious vulgarism for
"Zanjir," which however, has occurred before.

[FN#52]  Arab.  "Arafshah."

[FN#53]  In the "Mishkat al-Masabih" (ii. 341), quoted by Lane,
occurs the Hadis, "Shut your doors anights and when so doing
repeat the Basmalah; for the Devil may not open a door shut in
Allah's name."  A pious Moslem in Egypt always ejaculates, "In
the name of Allah, the Compassionating," etc., when he locks a
door, covers up bread, doffs his clothes, etc., to keep off
devils and daemons.

[FN#54]  An Arab idiom meaning, "I have not found thy good
fortune (Ka'b = heel, glory, prosperity) do me any good."

[FN#55]  Arab.  "Ya Nakbah" = a calamity to those who have to do
with thee!

[FN#56]  Koran cxii., the "Chapter of Unity."  See vol. iii. 307

[FN#57]  See vol. iii. 222.

[FN#58]  Here the author indubitably speaks for himself,
forgetting that he ended Night cclxxxi. (Bresl. Iv. 168), and
began that following with Shahrazad's usual formula.

[FN#59]  i.e., "Delight of the vitals" (or heart).

[FN#60]  The trick is a rechauffe of the trick played on Al-
Rashid and Zubaydah.

[FN#61]  "Kalb" here is not heart, but stomach.  The big toes of
the Moslem corpse are still tied in most countries, and in some a
sword is placed upon the body; but I am not aware that a knife
and sale (both believed to repel evil spirits) are so used in
Cairo.

[FN#62]  The Moslem, who may not wear unmixed silk during his
lifetime, may be shrouded in it.  I have noted that the
"Shukkah," or piece, averages six feet in length.

[FN#63]  A vulgar ejaculation; the "hour" referring either to
birth or to his being made one of the Caliph's equerries.

[FN#64]  Here the story-teller omits to say that Masrur bore
witness to the Caliph's statement.

[FN#65]  Arab.  "Wa kuntu raihah ursil warak," the regular Fellah
language.

[FN#66]  Arab.  "'Irk al-Hashimi."  See vol. ii. 19.  Lane
remarks, "Whether it was so in Hashim himself (or only in his
descendants), I do not find; but it is mentioned amongst the
characteristics of his great-grandson, the Prophet."

[FN#67]  Arab.  "Bostan al-Nuzhah," whose name made the stake
appropriate.  See vol. ii. 81.

[FN#68]  Arab.  "Tamasil" = generally carved images, which,
amongst Moslem, always suggest idols and idolatry.

[FN#69]  The "Shubbak" here would be the "Mashrabiyah," or
latticed balcony, projecting from the saloon-wall, and containing
room for three or more sitters.  It is Lane's "Mesrebeeyeh,"
sketched in M.E. (Introduction) and now has become familiar to
Englishmen.

[FN#70]  This is to show the cleverness of Abu al-Hasan, who had
calculated upon the difference between Al-Rashid and Zubaydah.
Such marvels of perspicacity are frequent enough in the folk-lore
of the Arabs.

[FN#71]  An artful touch, showing how a tale grows by repetition.
In Abu al-Hasan's case (infra) the eyes are swollen by the
swathes.

[FN#72]  A Hadis attributed to the Prophet, and very useful to
Moslem husbands when wives differ overmuch with them in opinion.

[FN#73]  Arab. "Masarat fi-ha," which Lane renders, "And she
threw money to her."

[FN#74]  A saying common throughout the world, especially when
the afflicted widow intends to marry again at the first
opportunity.

[FN#75]  Arab. "Ya Khalati" = O my mother's sister; addressed by
a woman to an elderly dame.

[FN#76]  i.e., That I may put her to shame.

[FN#77]  Arab.  "Zalabiyah."

[FN#78]  Arab.  "'Ala al-Kaylah," which Mr. Payne renders by
"Siesta-carpet."  Land reads "Kiblah" ("in the direction of the
Kiblah") and notes that some Moslems turn the corpse's head
towards Meccah and others the right side, including the face.  So
the old version reads "feet towards Mecca."  But the preposition
"Ala" requires the former sig.

[FN#79]  Many places in this text are so faulty that translation
is mere guess-work; e.g. "Basharah" can hardly be applied to ill-
news.

[FN#80]  i.e. of grief for his loss.

[FN#81]  Arab.  "Tobani" which Lane renders "two clods."  I have
noted that the Tob (Span. Adobe = Al-Tob) is a sunbaked brick.
Beating the bosom with such material is still common amongst
Moslem mourners of the lower class, and the hardness of the blow
gives the measure of the grief.

[FN#82]  i.e. of grief for her loss.

[FN#83]  Arab.  "Ihtirak" often used in the metaphorical sense of
consuming, torturing.

[FN#84]  Arab.  "Halawat," lit.=a sweetmeat, a gratuity, a thank-
offering.

[FN#85]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vi. Pp. 182-188, Nights ccccxxxii.-
ccccxxxiv.

[FN#86]  "The good Caliph" and the fifth of the Orthodox, the
other four being Abu Bakr, Omar, Osman and Ali; and omitting the
eight intervening, Hasan the grandson of the Prophet included.
He was the 13th Caliph and 8th Ommiade A.H. 99-101 (=717-720) and
after a reign of three years he was poisoned by his kinsmen of
the Banu Umayyah who hated him for his piety, asceticism, and
severity in making them disgorge their ill-gotten gains.  Moslem
historians are unanimous in his praise.  Europeans find him an
anachorete couronne, a froide et respectable figure, who lacked
the diplomacy of Mu'awiyah and the energy of Al-Hajjaj.  His
principal imitator was Al-Muhtadi bi'llah, who longed for a
return to the rare old days of Al-Islam.

[FN#87]  Omar 'Adi bin Artah; governor of Kufah and Basrah under
"the good Caliph."

[FN#88]  Jarir al-Khatafah, one of the most famous of the
"Islami" poets, i.e. those who wrote in the first century (A.H.)
before the corruption of language began.  (See Terminal Essay, p.
230).  Ibn Khallikan notices him at full length i. 294.

[FN#89]  Arab. "Bakiyah," which may also mean eternal as opposed
to "Faniyah" = temporal.  Omar's answer shows all the narrow-
minded fanaticism which distinguished the early Moslems: they
were puritanical as any Praise-God-Barebones, and they hated
"boetry and bainting" as hotly as any Hanoverian.

[FN#90]  The Saturday Review (Jan. 2, '86), which has honoured me
by the normal reviling in the shape of a critique upon my two
first vols., complains of the "Curious word Abhak" as "a
perfectly arbitrary and unusual group of Latin letters."  May I
ask Aristarchus how he would render "Sal'am" (vol ii. 24), which
apparently he would confine to "Arabic MSS."(!).  Or would he
prefer A(llah) b(less) h(im) a(nd) k(eep) "W.G.B." (whom God
bless) as proposed by the editor of Ockley?  But where would be
the poor old "Saturnine" if obliged to do better than the authors
it abuses?

[FN#91]  He might have said "by more than one, including the
great Labid."

[FN#92]  Fi-hi either "in him" (Mohammed) or "in it" (his
action).

[FN#93]  Chief of the Banu Sulaym.  According to Tabari, Abbas
bin Mirdas (a well-known poet), being dissatisfied with the booty
allotted to him by the Prophet, refused it and lampooned
Mohammed, who said to Ali, "Cut off this tongue which attacketh
me," i.e. "Silence him by giving what will satisfy him."
Thereupon Ali doubled the Satirist's share.

[FN#94]  Arab.  "Ya Bilal": Bilal ibn Rabah was the Prophet's
freedman and crier: see vol. iii. 106.  But bilal also signifies
"moisture" or "beneficence," "benefits": it may be intended for a
double entendre but I prefer the metonymy.

[FN#95]  The verses of this Kasidah are too full of meaning to be
easily translated: it is fine old poetry.

[FN#96]  i.e. of the Koraysh tribe.  For his disorderly life see
Ibn Khallikan ii. 372: he died, however, a holy death, battling
against the Infidels in A.H. 93 (= 711-12), some five years
before Omar's reign.

[FN#97]  Arab.  "Bayn farsi-k wa 'l-dami" = lit. between faeces
and menses, i.e., the foulest part of his mistress's person.  It
is not often that The Nights are "nasty"; but here is a case.
See vol. v. 162.

[FN#98]  "Jamil the Poet," and lover of Buthaynah: see vol. ii.
102, Ibn Khallikan (i.331), and Al-Mas'udi vi. 381, who quotes
him copiously.  He died A.H. 82 (= 701), or sixteen years before
Omar's reign.

[FN#99]  Arab.  "Safih" = the slab over the grave.

[FN#100]  A contemporary and friend of Jamil and the famous lover
of Azzah.  See vol. ii. 102, and Al-Mas'udi, vi. 426.  The word
"Kuthayyir" means "the dwarf."  Term. Essay, 231.

[FN#101]  i.e. in the attitude of prayer.

[FN#102]  In Bresl. Edit.  "Al-Akhwass," clerical error, noticed
in Ibn Khallikan i. 526.  His satires banished him to Dahlak
Island in the Red Sea, and he died A.H. 179 (= 795-96).

[FN#103]  Another famous poet Abu Firas Hammam or Humaym (dimin.
Form), as debauched as Jarir, who died forty days before him in
A.H. 110 (= 728-29), as Basrah.  Cf. Term. Essay, 231.

[FN#104]  A famous Christian poet.  See C. de Perceval, Journ.
Asiat. April, 1834, Ibn Khallikan iii. 136, and Term. Essay, 231.

[FN#105]  The poet means that unlike other fasters he eats meat
openly.  See Pilgrimage (i. 110), for the popular hypocrisy.

[FN#106]  Arab.  "Batha" the lowlands and plains outside the
Meccan Valley.  See al-Mas'udi, vi. 157.  Mr. (now Sir) W. Muir
in his Life of Mahomet, vol. i., p. ccv., remarks upon my
Pilgrimage (iii.252) that in placing Arafat 12 miles from Meccah,
I had given 3 miles to Muna, + 3 to Muzdalifah + 3 to Arafat = 9.
But the total does not include the suburbs of Meccah and the
breadth of the Arafat-Valley.

[FN#107]  The words of the Azan, vol. i. 306.

[FN#108]  Wine in Arabic is feminine, "Shamul" = liquor hung in
the wind to cool, a favourite Arab practice often noticed by the
poets.

[FN#109]  i.e. I will fall down dead drunk.

[FN#110]  Arab.  "Aram," plur. of Irm, a beautiful girl, a white
deer.  The word is connected with the Heb. Reem (Deut. xxxiii.
17), which has been explained unicorn, rhinoceros, and aurochs.
It is at the Ass. Rimu, the wild bull of the mountains, provided
with a human face, and placed at the palace-entrance to frighten
away foes, demon or human.

[FN#111]  i.e. she who ensnares [all]  eyes.

[FN#112]  Imam, the spiritual title of the Caliph, as head of the
Faith and leader (lit. "foreman," Antistes) of the people at
prayer.  See vol. iv. 111.

[FN#113]  For Yamamah see vol. ii. 104.  Omar bin Abd-al-Aziz was
governor of the province before he came to the Caliphate.  To the
note on Zarka, the blue-eyed Yamamite, I may add that Marwan was
called Ibn Zarka, son of "la femme au drapeu bleu," such being
the sign of a public prostitute.  Al-Mas'udi, v. 509.

[FN#114]  Rain and bounty, I have said, are synonymous.

[FN#115]  About L4.

[FN#116]  i.e. what is thy news.

[FN#117]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vi. pp. 188-9, Night ccccxxxiv.

[FN#118]  Of this masterful personage and his energie indomptable
I have spoken in vol. iv. 3, and other places.  I may add that he
built Wasit city A.H. 83 and rendered eminent services to
literature and civilization amongst the Arabs.  When the Ommiade
Caliph Abd al-Malik was dying he said to his son Walid, "Look to
Al-Hajjaj and honour him for, verily, he it is who hath covered
for you the pulpits; and he is thy sword and thy right hand
against all opponents; thou needest him more than he needeth
thee, and when I die summon the folk to the covenant of
allegiance; and he who saith with his head--thus, say thou with
thy sword--thus" (Al-Siyuti, p 225) yet the historian simply
observes, "the Lord curse him."

[FN#119]  i.e. given through his lieutenant.

[FN#120]  "Necks" per synecdochen for heads.  The passage is a
description of a barber-surgeon in a series of double-entendres
the "nose-pierced" (Makhzum) is the subject who is led by the
nose like a camel with halter and ring and the "breaker" (hashim)
may be a breaker of bread as the word originally meant, or
breaker of bones.  Lastly the "wealth" (mal) is a recondite
allusion to the hair.

[FN#121]  Arab.  "Kadr" which a change of vowel makes "Kidr" = a
cooking-pot.  The description is that of an itinerant seller of
boiled beans (Ful mudammas) still common in Cairo.  The "light of
his fire" suggests a double-entendre some powerful Chief like
masterful King Kulayb.  See vol. ii. 77.

[FN#122]  Arab.  "Al-Sufuf," either ranks of fighting-men or the
rows of thread on a loom.  Here the allusion is to a weaver who
levels and corrects his threads with the wooden spate and shuttle
governing warp and weft and who makes them stand straight (behave
aright).  The "stirrup" (rikab) is the loop of cord in which the
weaver's foot rests.

[FN#123]  "Adab."  See vols. i. 132, and ix. 41.

[FN#124]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vi. pp. 189-191, Night ccccxxxiv.

[FN#125]  Arab.  "Za'mu," a word little used in the Cal., Mac. or
Bul. Edit.; or in the Wortley Montague MS.; but very common in
the Bresl. text.

[FN#126]  More double-entendres.  "Thou hast done justice"
('adalta) also means "Thou hast swerved from right;" and "Thou
hast wrought equitably" (Akasta iv. of Kast) = "Thou hast
transgressed."

[FN#127]  Koran vi. 44.  Allah is threatening unbelievers, "And
when they had forgotten their warnings We set open to them the
gates of all things, until, when they were gladdened," etc.

[FN#128]  Arab.  "Ta'dilu," also meaning, "Ye do injustice":
quoted from Koran iv. 134.

[FN#129]  Arab.  "Al-Kasituna," before explained.  Koran lxxii.
15.

[FN#130]  Bresl. Edit. vol. vi. pp. 191-343, Nights ccccxxxv-
cccclxxxvii. This is the old Persi