an Bakhtyar Nameh, i.e., the
Book of Bakhtyar, so called from the prince and hero "Fortune's
Friend." In the tale of Jili'ad and Shimas the number of Wazirs
is seven, as usual in the Sindibad cycle. Here we have the full
tale as advised by the Imam al-Jara'i: "it is meet for a man
before entering upon important undertakings to consult ten
intelligent friends; if he have only five to apply twice to each;
if only one, ten times at different visits, and if none, let him
repair to his wife and consult her; and whatever she advises him
to do let him do the clear contrary" (quoting Omar), or as says
Tommy Moore,

          Whene'er you're in doubt, said a sage I once knew,
          'Twixt two lines of conduct which course to pursue,
          Ask a woman's advice, and whate'er she advise
          Do the very reverse, and you're sure to be wise.

The Romance of the Ten Wazirs occurs in dislocated shape in the
"Nouveaux Contes Arabes, ou Supplement aux Mille et une Nuits,"
etc., par M. l'Abbe * * * Paris, 1788. It is the "Story of
Bohetzad (Bakht-zad=Luck-born, v.p.), and his Ten Viziers," in
vol. iii., pp. 2-30 of the "Arabian Tales," etc., published by
Dom Chavis and M. Cazotte, in 1785; a copy of the English
translation by Robert Heron, Edinburgh, 1792, I owe to the
kindness of Mr. Leonard Smithers of Sheffield. It appears also in
vol. viii. of M. C. de Perceval's Edition of The Nights; in
Gauttier's Edition (vol. vi.), and as the "Historia Decem
Vizirorum et filii Regis Azad-bacht," text and translation by
Gustav Knos, of Goettingen (1807). For the Turkish, Malay and
other versions see (p. xxxviii. etc.) "The Bakhtiy r N ma," etc.
Edited (from the Sir William. Ouseley version of 1801) by Mr. W.
A. Clouston and privately printed, London, 1883. The notes are
valuable but their worth is sadly injured by the want of an
index. I am pleased to see that Mr. E. J. W. Gibb is publishing
the "History of the Forty Vezirs; or, the Story of the Forty
Morns and Eves," written in Turkish by "Sheykh-Zadah," evidently
a nom de plume (for Ahmad al-Misri?), and translated from an
Arabic MS. which probably dated about the xvth century.

[FN#131]  In Chavis and Cazotte, the "kingdom of Dineroux
(comprehending all Syria and the isles of the Indian Ocean) whose
capital was Issessara." An article in the Edinburgh Review (July,
1886), calls the "Supplement" a "bare-faced forgery"; but
evidently the writer should have "read up" his subject before
writing.

[FN#132]  The Persian form; in Arab. Sijistan, the classical
Drangiana or province East of Fars=Persia proper. It is famed in
legend as the feof of hero Rustam.

[FN#133]  Arab. Rawi=a professional tale-teller, which Mr. Payne
justly holds to be a clerical error for "Rai, a beholder, one who
seeth."

[FN#134]  In Persian the name would be Bahr-i-Jaur="luck" (or
fortune, "bahr") of Jaur- (or Jur-) city.

[FN#135]  Supply "and cared naught for his kingdom."

[FN#136]  Arab. "Atraf," plur. of "Tarf," a great and liberal
lord.

[FN#137]  Lit. "How was," etc. Kayf is a favourite word not only
in the Bresl. Edit., but throughout Egypt and Syria. Classically
we should write "Ma;" vulgarly "Aysh."

[FN#138]  Karmania vulg. and fancifully derived from Kirman
Pers.=worms because the silkworm is supposed to have been bred
there; but the name is of far older date as we find the Asiatic
Aethiopians of Herodotus (iii. 93) lying between the Germanii
(Karman) and the Indus. Also Karmania appears in Strabo and Sinus
Carmanicus in other classics.

[FN#139]  Arab. "Ka'id"; lit.=one who sits with, a colleague,
hence the Span. Alcayde; in Marocco it is=colonel, and is
prefixed e.g. Ka'id Maclean.

[FN#140]  A favourite food; Al-Hariri calls the dates and cream,
which were sold together in bazars, the "Proud Rider on the
desired Steed."

[FN#141]  In Bresl. Edit. vi. 198 by misprint "Kutru": Chavis and
Cazotte have "Kassera." In the story of Bihkard we find a P.N.
"Yatru."

[FN#142]  i.e. waylaying travellers, a term which has often
occurred.

[FN#143]  i.e. the royal favour.

[FN#144]  i.e. When the fated hour came down (from Heaven).

[FN#145]  As the Nights have proved in many places, the Asl
(origin) of a man is popularly held to influence his conduct
throughout life. So the Jeweller's wife (vol. ix.) was of servile
birth, which accounted for her vile conduct; and reference is
hardly necessary to a host of other instances. We can trace the
same idea in the sayings and folk-lore of the West, e.g. Bon sang
ne peut mentir, etc., etc.

[FN#146]  i.e. "What deemest thou he hath done?"

[FN#147]  The apodosis wanting "to make thee trust in him?"

[FN#148]  In the Braj Bakha dialect of Hindi, we find quoted in
the Akhlak-i-Hindi, "Tale of the old Tiger and the Traveller":--

     Jo jako paryo subhao jae na jio-sun;
     Nim na mitho hoe sichh gur ghio sun.

     Ne'er shall his nature fall a man whate'er that nature be,
     The Nim-tree bitter shall remain though drenched with Gur
               and Ghi.

The Nim (Melia Azadirachta) is the "Persian lilac" whose leaves,
intensely bitter, are used as a preventive to poison: Gur is the
Anglo-Indian Jaggeri=raw sugar and Ghi clarified butter. Roebuck
gives the same proverb in Hindostani.

[FN#149]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Kaskas; or the
Obstinate Man." For ill-luck, see Miss Frere's "Old Deccan Days"
(p. 171), and Giles's "Strange Stories," &c. (p. 430), where the
young lady says to Ma, "You often asked me for money; but on
account of your weak luck I hitherto refrained from giving it."

[FN#150]  True to life in the present day, as many a standing
hay-rick has shown.

[FN#151]  The "Munajjim" is a recognised authority in Egyptian
townlets, and in the village republics of Southern India the
"Jyoshi" is one of the paid officials.

[FN#152]  Arab. "Amin" sub. and adj. In India it means a
Government employe who collects revenue; in Marocco a
commissioner sent by His Sharifian Majesty.

[FN#153]  Our older word for divers=Arab "Ghawwasun": a single
pearl (in the text Jauhar=the Port. AIjofar) is called
"habbah"=grain or seed.

[FN#154]  The kindly and generous deed of one Moslem to another,
and by no means rare in real life.

[FN#155]  "Eunuch," etymologically meaning chamberlain (     +
     ), a bed-chamber-servant or slave, was presently confined to
castrated men found useful for special purposes, like gelded
horses, hounds, and cockerels turned to capons. Some writers hold
that the creation of the semivir or apocopus began as a
punishment in Egypt and elsewhere; and so under the Romans
amputation of the "peccant part" was frequent: others trace the
Greek "invalid," i.e., impotent man, to marital jealousy, and not
a few to the wife who wished to use the sexless for hard work in
the house without danger to the slave-girls.  The origin of the
mutilation is referred by Ammianus Marcellinus (lib. iv. chap.
17), and the Classics generally, to Semiramis, an "ancient queen"
of decidedly doubtful epoch, who thus prevented the propagation
of weaklings. But in Genesis (xxxvii. 36; xxxix. 1, margin) we
find Potiphar termed a "Sarim" (castrato), an "extenuating
circumstance" for Mrs. P. Herodotus (iii. chap. 48) tells us that
Periander, tyrant of Corinth, sent three hundred Corcyrean boys
to Alyattes for castration              , and that Panionios of
Chios sold caponised lads for high prices (viii. 105): he notices
(viii. 104 and other places) that eunuchs "of the Sun, of Heaven,
of the hand of God," were looked upon as honourable men amongst
the Persians whom Stephanus and Brissonius charge with having
invented the name (Dabistan i. 171). Ctesias also declares that
the Persian kings were under the influence of eunuchs. In the
debauched ages of Rome the women found a new use for these
effeminates, who had lost only the testes or testiculi=the
witnesses (of generative force): it is noticed by Juvenal (i. 22;
ii. 365-379; vi. 366)

        --sunt quos imbelles et mollia semper
Oscula delectant.

So Martial,

          --vult futui Gallia, non parere,

And Mirabeau knew (see Kadisah) "qu'ils mordent les femmes et les
liment avec une precieuse continuite." (Compare my vol. ii. 90;
v. 46.) The men also used them as catamites (Horace i. Od.
xxxvii.).

          "Contaminato cum grege turpium,
            Morbo virorum."

In religion the intestabilis or intestatus was held ill-omened,
and not permitted to become a priest (Seneca Controv. ii. 4), a
practice perpetuated in the various Christian churches. The
manufacture was forbidden, to the satisfaction of Martial, by
Domitian, whose edict Nero confirmed; and was restored by the
Byzantine empire, which advanced eunuchs, like Eutropius and
Narses, to the highest dignities of the realm. The cruel custom
to the eternal disgrace of mediaeval Christianity was revived in
Rome for providing the choirs in the Sistine Chapel and elsewhere
with boys' voices. Isaiah mentions the custom (Ivi. 3-6).
Mohammed, who notices in the Koran (xxiv. 31), "such men as
attend women and have no need of women," i.e., "have no natural
force," expressly forbade (iv. 118), "changing Allah's
creatures," referring, say the commentators, to superstitious
earcropping of cattle, tattooing, teeth-sharpening, sodomy,
tribadism, and slave-gelding. See also the "Hidayah," vol. iv.
121; and the famous divine AI-Siyuti, the last of his school,
wrote a tractate Fi 'I-Tahrimi Khidmati 'I-Khisyan=on the
illegality of using eunuchs. Yet the Harem perpetuated the
practice throughout AI-Islam and African jealousy made a gross
abuse of it. To quote no other instance, the Sultan of Dar-For
had a thousand eunuchs under a Malik or king, and all the chief
offices of the empire, such as Ab (father) and Bab (door), were
monopolised by these neutrals. The centre of supply was the Upper
Nile, where the operation was found dangerous after the age of
fifteen, and when badly performed only one in four survived. For
this reason, during the last century the Coptic monks of Girgah
and Zawy al-Dayr, near Assiout, engaged in this scandalous
traffic, and declared that it was philanthropic to operate
scientifically (Prof. Panuri and many others). Eunuchs are now
made in the Sudan, Nubia, Abyssinia, Kordofan, and Dar-For,
especially the Messalmiyah district: one of those towns was
called "Tawashah" (eunuchry) from the traffic there conducted by
Fukaha or religious teachers. Many are supplied by the district
between Majarah (Majarash?) and the port Masawwah; there are also
depots at Mbadr, near Tajurrah-harbour, where Yusuf Bey, Governor
in 1880, caponised some forty boys, including the brother of a
hostile African chief: here also the well-known Abu Bakr was
scandalously active. It is calculated that not less than eight
thousand of these unfortunates are annually exported to Arabia,
Egypt, and Turkey. Article IV. of the AngIo-Egyptian Convention
punishes the offense with death, and no one would object to
hanging the murderer under whose mutilating razor a boy dies. Yet
this, like most of our modern "improvements" in Egypt, is a mere
brutum fulmen. The crime is committed under our very eyes, but we
will not see it.

The Romans numbered three kinds of eunuchs:--1. Castrati,
clean-shaved, from Gr.       ; 2. Spadones, from     , when the
testicles are torn out, not from "Spada," town of Persia; and, 3.
Thlibii, from      , to press, squeeze, when the testicles are
bruised, &c. In the East also, as I have stated (v. 46), eunuchs
are of three kinds:--1. Sandali, or the clean-shaved, the
classical apocopus. The parts are swept off by a single cut of a
razor, a tube (tin or wooden) is set in the urethra, the wound is
cauterised with boiling oil, and the patient is planted in a
fresh dunghill. His diet is milk; and if under puberty, he often
survives. This is the eunuque aqueduc, who must pass his water
through a tube. 2. The eunuch whose penis is removed: he retains
all the power of copulation and procreation without the
wherewithal; and this, since the discovery of caoutchouc, has
often been supplied. 3. The eunuch, or classical Thlibias and
Semivir, who has been rendered sexless by removing the testicles
(as the priests of Cybele were castrated with a stone knife), or
by bruising (the Greek Thlasias), twisting, searing, or bandaging
them. A more humane process has lately been introduced: a
horsehair is tied round the neck of the scrotum and tightened by
slow degrees till the circulation of the part stops and the bag
drops off without pain. This has been adopted in sundry Indian
regiments of Irregular Cavalry, and it succeeded admirably: the
animals rarely required a day's rest. The practice was known to
the ancients. See notes on Kadisah in Mirabeau. The Eunuchata
virgo was invented by the Lydians, according to their historian
Xanthus. Zachias (Quaest. medico-legal.) declares that the
process was one of infibulation or simple sewing up the vulva;
but modern experience has suggested an operation like the
"spaying" of bitches, or mutilation of the womb, in modern
euphuism "baby-house." Dr. Robert ("Journey from Delhi to Bombay,
Muller's Archiv. 1843") speaks of a eunuch'd woman who after
ovariotomy had no breasts, no pubes, no rotundities, and no
desires. The Australians practice exsection of the ovaries
systematically to make women barren. Miklucho Maclay learned from
the traveller Retsch that about Lake Parapitshurie men's urethras
were split, and the girls were spayed: the latter showing two
scars in the groin. They have flat bosoms, but feminine forms,
and are slightly bearded; they mix with the men, whom they
satisfy mechanically, but without enjoyment (?). MacGillivray, of
the "Rattlesnake," saw near Cape York a woman with these scars:
she was a surdo-mute, and had probably been spayed to prevent
increase. The old Scandinavians, from Norway to Iceland,
systematically gelded "sturdy vagrants" in order that they might
not beget bastards. The Hottentots before marriage used to cut
off the left testicle, meaning by such semi-castration to prevent
the begetting of twins. This curious custom, mentioned by the
Jesuit Tochard, Boeving, and Kolbe, is now apparently obsolete--
at least, the traveller Fritsch did not find it.

[FN#156]  Arab. "Haram"="forbidden," sinful.

[FN#157]  In Chavis and Cazotte, who out-galland'd Galland in
transmogrifying the Arabic, this is the "Story of Illage
(AI-Hajj) Mahomet and his sons; or, the Imprudent Man." The tale
occurs in many forms and with great modifications. See, for
instance, the Gesta Romanorum "Of the miraculous recall of
sinners and of the consolation which piety offers to the
distressed," the adventures of the knight Placidus, vol. ii. 99.
Charles Swan, London. Rivington, 1824.

[FN#158]  i.e. For fear of the "eye"; see vol. i. 123 and passim.
In these days the practice is rare; but, whenever you see at
Cairo an Egyptian dame daintily dressed and leading by the hand a
grimy little boy whose eyes are black with flies and whose dress
is torn and unclean, you see what has taken its place. And if you
would praise the brat you must not say "Oh, what a pretty boy!"
but "Inshallah!"--the Lord doth as he pleaseth.

[FN#159]  The adoption of slave lads and lasses was and is still
common among Moslems.

[FN#160]  I have elsewhere noted this "pathetic fallacy" which is
a lieu commun of Eastern folk-lore and not less frequently used
in the mediaeval literature of Europe before statistics were
invented.

[FN#161]  Arab. "Yaskut min 'Aynayh," lit.=fall from his two
eyes, lose favour.

[FN#162]  i.e. killing a man.

[FN#163]  i.e. we can slay him whenever we will.

[FN#164]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Abosaber the Patient."
"Abu-Sabir" would mean "Father of the Patient (one)."

[FN#165]  Arab. "Dihkan," in Persian a villager; but here
something more, a villageelder or chief. AI-Mas'udi (chap.
xxiv.), and other historians apply the term to a class of noble
Persians descended from the ten sons of Wahkert, the
first,"Dihkan," the fourth generation from King Kayomars.

[FN#166]  Reminding one not a little of certain anecdotes anent
Quakers, current in England and English-speaking lands.

[FN#167]  Arab. "Karyah," a word with a long history. The root
seems to be Karaha, he met; in Chald. Karih and Karia (emphatic
Karita)=a town or city; and in Heb. Kirjath, Kiryathayim, etc. We
find it in Carthage= Karta hadisah, or New Town as opposed to
Utica (Atikah)=Old Town; in Carchemish and in a host of similar
compounds. In Syria and Egypt Kariyah, like Kafr, now means a
hamlet, a village.

[FN#168]  i.e. wandering at a venture.

[FN#169]  Arab. "Sakhrah," the old French Corvee, and the "Begar"
of India.

[FN#170]  Arab. "Matmurah:" see vol. ii. 39, where it was used as
an "underground cell." The word is extensively used in the
Maghrib or Western Africa.

[FN#171]  Arab. "Ya Aba Sabir." There are five vocative particles
in Arabic; "Ya," common to the near and far; "Aya" (ho!) and
"Haya" (holla!) addressed to the far, and "Ay" and "A"
(A-'Abda-llahi, O Abdullah), to those near. All govern the
accusative of a noun in construction in the literary language
only; and the vulgar use none but the first named. The
English-speaking races neglect the vocative particle, and I never
heard it except in the Southern States of the AngloAmerican
Union=Oh, Mr. Smith.

[FN#172]  He was not honest enough to undeceive them; a neat
Quaker-like touch.

[FN#173]  Here the oath is justified; but the reader will have
remarked that the name of Allah is often taken in vain. Moslems,
however, so far from holding this a profanation deem it an
acknowledgment of the Omnipotence and Omnipresence. The Jews from
whom the Christians have borrowed had an interest in concealing
the name of their tribal divinity; and therefore made it
ineffable.

[FN#174]  i.e. the grave, the fosse commune of slain men.

[FN#175]  A fancy name; "Zawash" in Pers. is =      the planet
Jupiter, either borrowed from Greece, or both descended from some
long forgotten ancestor.

[FN#176]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Bhazad (!) the
Impatient." The name is Persian, Bih (well, good) Zad (born). In
the adj. bih we recognize a positive lost in English and German
which retain the comparative (bih-tar = better) and superlative
(bih-tarin=best).

[FN#177]  i.e. the moiety kept by the bridegroom, a contingent
settlement paid at divorce or on the death of the husband.

[FN#178]  Arab. "Rumh"=the horseman's lance not the footman's
spear.

[FN#179]  i.e. became a highwayman (a time-honoured and
honourable career) in order to collect money for completing the
dowry.

[FN#180]  i.e. to the bride, the wedding-day; not to be
confounded with "going in unto" etc.

[FN#181]  Probably meaning that she saw the eyes espying through
the crevice without knowing whose they were.

[FN#182]  A fancy name intended to be Persian

[FN#183]  i.e. thy Harem, thy women.

[FN#184]  i.e. thy life hath been unduly prolonged.

[FN#185]  See Chavis and Cazotte, "Story of Ravia (Arwa!) the
Resigned." Dadbin (Persian)=one who looks to justice, a name
hardly deserved in this case.

[FN#186]  For this important province and city of Persia, see
Al-Mas'udi, ii. 2; iv. 86, etc. It gave one of the many names to
the Caspian Sea. The adjective is Tabari, whereas Tabarani=native
of Tiberias (Tabariyah).

[FN#187]  Zor-khan=Lord Violence, and Kar-dan=Business-knower;
both Persian.

[FN#188]  "Arwa" written with a terminal of ya is a woman's P.N.
in Arabic.

[FN#189]  i.e. Not look down upon me with eyes of contempt. This
"marrying below one" is still an Eastern idea, very little known
to women in the West.

[FN#190]  Chavis and Cazotte call the Dabbus a "dabour" and
explain it as a "sort of scepter used by Eastern Princes, which
serves also as a weapon." For the Dabbus, or mace, see vol. vi.
249.

[FN#191]  i.e. Let thy purposes be righteous as thine outward
profession.

[FN#192]  See vol. vi. 130. This is another lieu commun amongst
Moslems; and its unfact requires only statement.

[FN#193]  Afterwards called his "chamberlain," i.e. guardian of
the Harem-door.

[FN#194]  i.e. Chosroes, whom Chavis and Cazotte make "Cyrus."

[FN#195]  Arab. "Takiyah," used for the Persian Takhtrawan,
common in The Nights.

[FN#196]  Arab. "Kubbah," a dome-shaped tent, as elsewhere.

[FN#197]  This can refer only to Abu al-Khayr's having been put
to death on Kardan's charge, although the tale-teller, with
characteristic inconsequence, neglected to mention the event.

[FN#198]  Not referring to skull sutures, but to the forehead,
which is poetically compared with a page of paper upon which
Destiny writes her irrevocable decrees.

[FN#199]  Said in the grimmest earnest, not jestingly, as in vol.
iv. 264.

[FN#200]  i.e. the lex talionis, which is the essence of Moslem,
and indeed, of all criminal jurisprudence. We cannot wonder at
the judgment of Queen Arwa: even Confucius, the mildest and most
humane of lawgivers, would not pardon the man who allowed his
father's murderer to live. The Moslem lex talionis (Koran ii.
173) is identical with that of the Jews (Exod. xxi. 24), and the
latter probably derives from immemorial usage. But many modern
Rabbins explain away the Mosaical command as rather a demand for
a pecuniary mulct than literal retaliation. The well-known Isaac
Aburbanel cites many arguments in proof of this position: he
asks, for instance, supposing the accused have but one eye,
should he lose it for having struck out one of another man's two?
Moreover, he dwells upon the impossibility of inflicting a
punishment the exact equivalent of the injury; like Shylock's
pound of flesh without drawing blood. Moslems, however, know
nothing of these frivolities, and if retaliation be demanded the
judge must grant it. There is a legend in Marocco of an English
merchant who was compelled to forfeit tooth for tooth at the
instance of an old woman, but a profitable concession gilded the
pill.

[FN#201]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Bhazmant (!); or the
Confident Man." "Bakht (-i-) Zaman" in Pers. would=Luck of the
Time.

[FN#202]  Chavis and Cazotte change the name to "Abadid," which,
like "Khadidan," is nonsignificant.

[FN#203]  Arab. "Faris," here a Reiter, or Dugald Dolgetti, as
mostly were the hordes led by the mediaeval Italian Condottieri.

[FN#204]  So Napoleon the Great also believed that Providence is
mostly favorable to "gros bataillons."

[FN#205]  Pers. and Arab.="Good perfection."

[FN#206]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Baharkan." Bihkard (in
Shiraz pronounced "Kyard")="Well he did."

[FN#207]  See "Katru" in the Introduction to the Bakhtiyar-namah.

[FN#208]  The text has "Jaukalan" for Saulajan, the Persian
"Chaugan"=the crooked bat used in Polo. See vol. 1. 46.

[FN#209]  Amongst Moslems, I have noted, circumstantial evidence
is not lawful: the witness must swear to what he has seen. A
curious consideration, how many innocent men have been hanged by
"circumstantial evidence." See vol. v. 97.

[FN#210]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Abattamant (!), or the
Prudent Man;" also Aylan Shah becomes Olensa after Italian
fashion.

[FN#211]  In Arab. idiom a long hand or arm means power, a phrase
not wholly unused in European languages. Chavis and Cazotte
paraphrase "He who keeps his hands crossed upon his breast, shall
not see them cut off."

[FN#212]  Arab. "Jama'a atrafah," lit.=he drew in his
extremities, it being contrary to "etiquette" in the presence of
a superior not to cover hands and feet. In the wild Argentine
Republic the savage Gaucho removes his gigantic spurs when coming
into the presence of his master.

[FN#213]  About the equivalent to the Arab. or rather Egypto-
Syrian form "Jiddan," used in the modern slang sense.

[FN#214]  i.e. that he become my son-in-law.

[FN#215]  For the practice of shampooing often alluded to in The
Nights, see vol. iii. 17. The king "sleeping on the boys' knees"
means that he dropped off whilst his feet were on the laps of the
lads.

[FN#216]  Meaning the honour of his Harem.

[FN#217]  Pardon, lit.=security; the cry for quarter already
introduced into English

          "Or raise the craven cry Aman."

It was Mohammed's express command that this prayer for mercy
should be respected even in the fury of fight. See vol. i. 342.

[FN#218]  A saying found in every Eastern language beginning with
Hebrew; Proverbs xxvi. 27, "Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall
therein."

[FN#219]  i.e. a domed tomb where prayers and perlections of the
Koran could be made. "Kubbah" in Marocco is still the term for a
small square building with a low medianaranja cupola under which
a Santon lies interred. It is the "little Waly" of our "blind
travellers" in the unholy "Holy Land."

[FN#220]  i.e. to secure her assistance in arousing the king's
wrath.

[FN#221]  i.e. so slow to avenge itself.

[FN#222]  Story of Sultan Hebriam (!), and his Son" (Chavis and
Cazotte). Unless they greatly enlarged upon the text, they had a
much fuller copy than that found in the Bresl. Edit.

[FN#223]  A right kingly king, in the Eastern sense of the word,
would strike off their heads for daring to see omens threatening
his son and heir: this would be constructive treason of the
highest because it might be expected to cause its own fulfilment.

[FN#224]  Mohammed's Hadis "Kazzibu 'l-Munajjimuna bi Rabbi
'I-Ka'abah"=the Astrologers lied, by the Ka'abah's Lord!

[FN#225]  Arab. "Khawatin," plur. of Khatun, a matron, a lady,
vol. iv. 66.

[FN#226]  See Al-Mas'udi, chapt. xvii. (Fr. Transl. ii. 48-49) of
the circular cavity two miles deep and sixty in circuit inhabited
by men and animals on the Caucasus near Derbend.

[FN#227]  Arab. "Nafas" lit.=breath. Arabs living in a land of
caverns know by experience the danger of asphyxiation in such
places.

[FN#228]  This simple tale is told with much pathos not of words
but of sense.

[FN#229]  Arab. "Ajal"=the appointed day of death, also used for
sudden death. See vol. i. 74.

[FN#230]  i.e. the Autumnal Equinox, one of the two great
festival days (the other being the New Year) of the Persians, and
surviving in our Michaelmas. According to Al-Mas'udi (chap.
xxi.), it was established to commemorate the capture of Zahhak
(Azhi-Dahaka), the biting snake (the Hindu Ahi) of night and
darkness, the Greek Astyages, by Furaydun or Feridun. Prof. Sayce
(Principles of Comparative Philology, p. 11) connects the latter
with the Vedic deity Trita, who harnessed the Sun-horse (Rig. v.
i. 163, 2, 3), the             of Homer, a title of Athene, the
Dawn-goddess, and Burnouf proved the same Trita to be Thraetaona,
son of Athwya, of the Avesta, who finally became Furaydun, the
Greek Kyrus. See vol. v. 1.

[FN#231]  In Chavis and Cazotte, "Story of Selimansha and his
Family."

[FN#232]  Arab. for Pers. Pahluwan (from Pahlau) a brave, a
warrior, an athlete, applied in India to a champion in any
gymnastic exercise, especially in wrestling. The Frenchman calls
him "Balavan"; and the Bresl. text in more than one place (p.
312) calls him "Bahwan."

[FN#233]  i.e. King (Arab.) King (Persian): we find also Sultan
Malik Shah=King King King.

[FN#234]  Arab. "Aulad-i," a vulgarism, plural for dual.

[FN#235]  Mr. Payne translates, "so he might take his father's
leavings" i.e. heritage, reading "Asar" which I hold to be a
clerical error for Sar=Vendetta, blood revenge (Bresl. Edit. vi.
310).

[FN#236]  Arab. "Al-'Asi" the pop. term for one who refuses to
obey a constituted authority and syn. with Pers. "Yaghi." "Ant
'Asi?" Wilt thou not yield thyself? says a policeman to a
refractory Fellah.

[FN#237]  i.e. of the Greeks: so in Kor. xxx. 1. "Alif Lam Mim,
the Greeks (Al-Roum) have been defeated." Mr. Rodwell curiously
remarks that "the vowel-points for 'defeated' not being
originally written, would make the prophecy true in either event,
according as the verb received an active or passive sense in
pronunciation." But in discovering this mare's nest, a rank piece
of humbug like Aio te Aeacida, etc., he forgets that all the
Prophet's "Companions," numbering some 5000, would pronounce it
only in one way and that no man could mistake "ghalabat" (active)
for "ghulibat" (passive).

[FN#238]  The text persistently uses "Jariyah"=damsel,
slave-girl, for the politer "Sabiyah"=young lady, being written
in a rude and uncourtly style.

[FN#239]  So our familiar phrase "Some one to back us."

[FN#240]  Arab. "'Akkada lahu ray," plur. of rayat, a banner. See
vol. iii. 307.

[FN#241]  i.e. "What concern hast thou with the king's health?"
The question is offensively put.

[FN#242]  Arab. "Masalah," a question; here an enigma.

[FN#243]  Arab. "Lialla" (i.e. li, an, la) lest; but printed here
and elsewhere with the ya as if it were "laylan,"=for a single
night.

[FN#244]  i.e. if my death be fated to befal to-day, none may
postpone it to a later date.

[FN#245]  Arab. "Dusti": so the ceremony vulgarly called "Doseh"
and by the ItaloEgyptians "Dosso," the riding over disciples'
backs by the Shaykh of the Sa'diyah Darwayshes (Lane M.E. chapt.
xxv.) which took place for the last time at Cairo in 1881.

[FN#246]  In Chavis and Cazotte she conjures him "by the great
Maichonarblatha Sarsourat" (Miat wa arba'at ashar Surat)=the 114
chapters of the Alcoran.

[FN#247]  I have noted that Moslem law is not fully satisfied
without such confession which, however, may be obtained by the
bastinado. It is curious to compare English procedure with what
Moslem would be in such a case as that of the famous Tichborne
Claimant. What we did need hardly be noticed. An Arab judge would
in a case so suspicious at once have applied the stick and in a
quarter of an hour would have settled the whole business; but
then what about the "Devil's own," the lawyers and lawyers' fees?
And he would have remarked that the truth is not less true
because obtained by such compulsory means.

[FN#248]  The Hudhud, so called from its cry "Hood! Hood!" It is
the Lat. upupa, Gr.      from its supposed note epip or upup; the
old Egyptian Kukufa; Heb. Dukiphath and Syriac Kikupha (Bochart
Hierozoicon, part ii. 347). The Spaniards call it Gallo de Marzo
(March-Cock) from its returning in that month, and our old
writers "lapwing" (Deut. xiv. 18). This foul-feeding bird derives
her honours from chapt. xxvii. of the Koran (q.v.), the Hudhud
was sharp-sighted and sagacious enough to discover water
underground which the devils used to draw after she had marked
the place by her bill.

[FN#249]  Here the vocative Ya is designedly omitted in poetical
fashion (e.g., Khaliliyya--my friend!) to show the speaker's
emotion. See p. 113 of Captain A. Lockett's learned and curious
work the "Miet Amil" (=Hundred Regimens), Calcutta, 1814.

[FN#250]  The story-teller introduces this last instance with
considerable art as a preface to the denouement.

[FN#251]  See Chavis and Cazotte "Story of the King of Haram and
the slave."

[FN#252]  i.e. men caught red-handed.

[FN#253]  Arab. "Libwah," one of the multitudinous names for the
king of beasts, still used in Syria where the animal has been
killed out, soon to be followed by the bear (U. Syriacus). The
author knows that lions are most often found in couples.

[FN#254]  Arab. "Himyan or Hamyan,"=a girdle.

[FN#255]  As he would kiss a son. I have never yet seen an
Englishman endure these masculine kisses, formerly so common in
France and Italy, without showing clearest signs of his disgust.

[FN#256]  A cheap way of rewarding merit, not confined to Eastern
monarchs, but practised by all contemporary Europe.

[FN#257]  Arab. "Kasf,"=houghing a camel so as to render it
helpless. The passage may read. "we are broken to bits (Kisi) by
our own sin."

[FN#258]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vii. pp. 251-4, Night dlxv.

[FN#259]  See vol. vi. 175. A Moslem should dress for public
occasions, like the mediaeval student, in vestibus (quasi) nigris
aut subfuscis; though not, except amongst the Abbasides,
absolutely black, as sable would denote Jewry.

[FN#260]  A well-known soldier and statesman, noted for piety and
austerity. A somewhat fuller version of this story, from which I
have borrowed certain details, is given in the Biographical
Dictionary of Ibn Khallikan (i. 303-4). The latter, however,
calls the first Abd al-Malik "Ibn Bahran" (in the index Ibn
Bahram), which somewhat spoils the story. "Ibn Khallikan,"
by-the-by, is derived popularly from "Khalli" (let go), and
"Kana" (it was, enough), a favourite expression of the author,
which at last superseded his real name, Abu al-Abbas Ahmad. He is
better off than the companion nicknamed by Mohammed Abu
Horayrah=Father of the She-kitten (not the cat), and who in
consequence has lost his true name and pedigree.

[FN#261]  In Ibn Khallikan (i. 303) he is called the "Hashimite,"
from his ancestor, Hashim ibn Abd Manaf. The Hashimites and
Abbasides were fine specimens of the Moslem "Pharisee," as he is
known to Christians, not the noble Purushi of authentic history.

[FN#262]  Meaning a cap, but of what shape we ignore. Ibn
Khallikan afterwards calls it a "Kalansua," a word still applied
to a mitre worn by Christian priests.

[FN#263]  Arab. "La baas," equivalent in conversation to our "No
matter," and "All right."

[FN#264]  As a member of the reigning family, he wore black
clothes, that being the especial colour of the Abbasides, adopted
by them in opposition to the rival dynasty of the Ommiades, whose
family colour was white, that of the Fatimites being green.  The
Moslems borrowed their sacred green, "the hue of the Pure," from
the old Nabatheans and the other primitive colours from the tents
of the captains who were thus distinguished.  Hence also amongst
the Turks and Tartars, the White Horde and the Black Horde.

[FN#265]  The word has often occurred, meaning date-wine or
grape-wine.  Ibn Khaldun contends that in Ibn Khallikan it here
means the former.

[FN#266]  L25,000.  Ibn Khallikan (i. 304) makes the debt four
millions of dirhams or L90,000-L100,000.

[FN#267]  In the Biographer occurs the equivalent phrase, "That a
standard be borne over his head."

[FN#268]  Here again we have a suggestion that Ja'afar presumed
upon his favour with the Caliph; such presumption would soon be
reported (perhaps by the austere intrigant himself) to the royal
ears, and lay the foundation of ill-will likely to end in utter
destruction.

[FN#269]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vii. pp. 258-60, Night dlxvii.

[FN#270]  Fourth Abbaside, A.D. 785-786, vol. v. 93.  He was a
fantastic tyrant who was bent upon promoting to the Caliphate his
own son, Ja'afar; he cast Harun into prison and would probably
have slain him but for the intervention of the mother of one of
the two brothers, Khayzaran widow of Al-Mahdi, and Yahya the
Barmecide.

[FN#271]  Third Abbaside, A.D. 775-785, vol. vii. 136; ix. 334.

[FN#272]  This reminds us of the Bir Al-Khatim (Well of the
Signet) at Al-Medinah; in which Caliph Osman during his sixth
year dropped from his finger the silver ring belonging to the
founder of Al-Islam, engraved in three lines with "Mohammed /
Apostle (of) / Allah /."  It had served to sign the letters sent
to neighboring kings and had descended to the first three
successors (Pilgrimage ii. 219).  Mohammed owned three seal-
rings, the golden one he destroyed himself; and the third, which
was of carnelian, was buried with other objects by his heirs.
The late Subhi Pasha used to declare that the latter had been
brought to him with early Moslem coins by an Arab, and when he
died he left it to the Sultan.

[FN#273]  Mr. Payne quotes Al-Tabari's version of this anecdote.
"El-Mehdi had presented his son Haroun with a ruby ring, worth a
hundred thousand dinars, and the latter being one day with his
brother (the then reigning Khalif), El Hadi saw the ring on his
finger and desired it.  So, when Haroun went out from him, he
sent after him, to seek the ring of him.  The Khalif's messenger
overtook Er Reshid on the bridge over the Tigris and acquainted
him with his errand; whereupon the prince, enraged at the demand,
pulled off the ring and threw it into the river.  When El Hadi
died and Er Rashid succeeded to the throne, he went with his
suite to the bridge in question and bade his Vizier Yehya ben
Khalid send for divers and cause them to make search for the
ring.  It had then been five months in the water and no one
believed it would be found.  However, the divers plunged into the
river and found the ring in the very place where he had thrown it
in, whereat Haroun rejoiced with an exceeding joy, regarding it
as a presage of fair fortune."

[FN#274]  Not historically correct.  Al-Rashid made Yahya, father
of Ja'afar, his Wazir; and the minister's two sons, Fazl and
Ja'afar, acted as his lieutenants for seventeen years from A.D.
786 till the destruction of the Barmecides in A.D. 803.  The
tale-teller quotes Ja'afar because he was the most famous of the
house.

[FN#275]  Perhaps after marrying Ja'afar to his sister.  But the
endearing name was usually addressed to Ja'afar's elder brother
Fazl, who was the Caliph's foster-brother.

[FN#276]  Read seventeen:  all these minor inaccuracies tend to
invalidate the main statement.

[FN#277]  Arab.  "Yar'ad" which may mean "thundereth."  The dark
saying apparently means, Do good whilst thou art in power and
thereby strengthen thyself.

[FN#278]  The lady seems to have made the first advances and Bin
Abu Hajilah quotes a sixaine in which she amorously addresses her
spouse.  See D'Herbelot, s.v. Abbassa.

[FN#279]  The tale-teller passes with a very light hand over the
horrors of a massacre which terrified and scandalised the then
civilised world, and which still haunt Moslem history.  The
Caliph, like the eking, can do no wrong; and, as Viceregent of
Allah upon Earth, what would be deadly crime and mortal sin in
others becomes in his case an ordinance from above.  These
actions are superhuman events and fatal which man must not judge
nor feel any sentiment concerning them save one of mysterious
respect.  For the slaughter of the Barmecides, see my Terminal
Essay, vol. x.

[FN#280]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vii. pp. 260-1, Night dlxviii.

[FN#281]  Ibn al-Sammak (Son of the fisherman or fishmonger),
whose name was Abu al-Abbas Mohammed bin Sabih, surnamed Al-
Mazkur (Ibn al-Athir says Al-Muzakkar), was a native of Kufah
(where he died in A.H. 183 = 799-80), a preacher and professional
tale-teller famed as a stylist and a man of piety.  Al-Siyuti (p.
292) relates of him that when honoured by the Caliph with
courteous reception he said to him, "Thy humility in thy
greatness is nobler than thy greatness."  He is known to have
been the only theologician who, ex cathedra, promised Al-Rashid a
place in Paradise.

[FN#282]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vii. pp. 261-2, Night dlxviii.

[FN#283]  Seventh Abbaside, A.H. 198-227 = 813-842.  See vol. iv.
109.  He was a favourite with his father, who personally taught
him tradition; but he offended the Faithful by asserting the
creation of the Koran, by his leaning to Shi'ah doctrine, and by
changing the black garments of the Banu Abbas into green.  He
died of a chill at Budandun, a day's march from Tarsus, where he
was buried: for this Podendon =             = stretch out thy
feet, see Al-Siyuti, pp. 326-27.

[FN#284]  Sixth Abbaside, A.D. 809-13.  See vol. v. 93: 152.  He
was of pure Abbaside blood on the father's side and his mother
Zubaydah's.  But he was unhappy in his Wazir Al-Fazl bin Rabi,
the intriguer against the Barmecides, who estranged him from his
brothers Al-Kasim and Al-Maamun.  At last he was slain by a party
of Persians, "who struck him with their swords and cut him
through the nape of his neck and went with his head to Tahir bin
al-Husayn, general to Al-Maamun, who set it upon a garden-wall
and made proclamation, This is the head of the deposed Mohammed
(Al-Amin)."  Al-Siyuti, pp. 306-311.  It was remarked by Moslem
annalists that every sixth Abbaside met with a violent death: the
first was this Mohammed al-Amin surnamed Al-Makhlu' = The
Deposed; the second sixth was Al-Musta'in; and the last was Al-
Muktadi bi'llah.

[FN#285]  Lit.  "Order and acceptance."  See the Tale of the
Sandal-wood Merchant and the Sharpers: vol. vi. 202.

[FN#286]  This is not noticed by Al-Siyuta (p. 318) who says that
his mother was a slave-concubine named Marajil who died in giving
him birth.  The tale in the text appears to be a bit of Court
scandal, probably suggested by the darkness of the Caliph's
complexion.

[FN#287]  Bresl. Edit., vol. viii. pp. 226-9, Nights dclx-i.

[FN#288]  King of the Arab kingdom of Hirah, for whom see vol. v.
74.  This ancient villain rarely appears in such favourable form
when tales are told of him.

[FN#289]  The tribe of the chieftain and poet, Hatim Tai, for
whom see vol. iv. 94.

[FN#290]  i.e. I will make a covenant with him before the Lord.
Here the word "Allah" is introduced among the Arabs of The
Ignorance.

[FN#291]  i.e. the man of the Tribe of Tay.

[FN#292]  A similar story of generous dealing is told of the
Caliph Omar in The Nights.  See vol. v. 99 et seq.

[FN#293]  Bresl. Edit., vol. viii. pp. 273-8, Nights dclxxv-vi.
In Syria and Egypt Firuz (the Persian "Piroz") = victorious,
triumphant, is usually pronounced Fayrus. The tale is a rechauffe
of the King and the Wazir's Wife in The Nights. See vol. vi. 129.

[FN#294]  i.e. I seek refuge with Allah = God forfend.

[FN#295]  Bresl. Edit., vol. xi. pp. 84-318, Nights
dccclxxv-dccccxxx. Here again the names are Persian, showing the
provenance of the tale; Shah Bakht is=King Luck and Rahwan is a
corruption of Rahban=one who keeps the (right) way; or it may be
Ruhban=the Pious. Mr. W. A. Clouston draws my attention to the
fact that this tale is of the Sindibad (Seven Wise Masters) cycle
and that he finds remotely allied to it a Siamese collection,
entitled Nonthuk Pakaranam in which Princess Kankras, to save the
life of her father, relates eighty or ninety tales to the king of
Pataliput (Palibothra). He purposes to discuss this and similar
subjects in extenso in his coming volumes, "Popular Tales and
Fictions: their Migrations and Transformations," to which I look
forward with pleasant anticipations.

[FN#296]  So far this work resembles the Bakhtiyar-nameh, in
which the ten Wazirs are eager for the death of the hero who
relates tales and instances to the king, warning him against the
evils of precipitation.

[FN#297]  One pilgrimage (Hajjat al-Islam) is commanded to all
Moslems. For its conditions see The Nights, vol. v. 202, et seq.

[FN#298]  Arab. "Hajj al-Sharif." For the expenses of the process
see my Pilgrimage iii. 12. As in all "Holy Places," from Rome to
Benares, the sinner in search of salvation is hopelessly taken in
and fleeced by the "sons of the sacred cities."

[FN#299]  Here a stranger invites a guest who at once accepts the
invitation; such is the freedom between Moslems at Meccah and
Al-Medinah, especially during pilgrimagetime.

[FN#300]  i.e. the master could no longer use her carnally.

[FN#301]  i.e. wantoned it away.

[FN#302]  Here "Al-Hajj"=the company of pilgrims, a common use of
the term.

[FN#303]  The text says, "He went on with the caravan to the
Pilgrimage," probably a clerical error. "Hajj" is never applied
to the Visitation (Ziyarah) at Al-Medinah.

[FN#304]  Arab. "Jawar," that is, he became a mujawir, one who
lives in or near a collegiate mosque. The Egyptian proverb says,
"He pilgrimaged: quoth one, Yes, and for his villainy lives
(yujawir) at Meccah," meaning that he found no other place bad
enough for him.

[FN#305]  I have often heard of this mysterious art in the East,
also of similarly making rubies and branch-coral of the largest
size, but, despite all my endeavours, I never was allowed to
witness the operation. It was the same with alchemy, which,
however, I found very useful to the "smasher." See my History of
Sindh, chapt. vii.

[FN#306]  Elsewhere in The Nights specified as white woolen
robes.

[FN#307]  Whilst she was praying the girl could not address her;
but the use of the rosary is a kind of "parergon."

[FN#308]  Arab. "Ya Hajjah" (in Egypt pronounced "Haggeh"), a
polite address to an elderly woman, who is thus supposed to have
"finished her faith."

[FN#309]  Arab. "Kanisah" (from Kans=sweeping) a pagan temple, a
Jewish synagogue, and especially a Christian church.

[FN#310]  i.e. standeth in prayer or supplication.

[FN#311]  i.e. fell into hysterics, a very common complaint
amongst the highly nervous and excitable races of the East.

[FN#312]  Arab. "Kahramanah," a word which has often occurred in
divers senses, nurse, duenna, chamberwoman, stewardess, armed
woman defending the Harem, etc.

[FN#313]  Which is supposed to contain the Harem.

[FN#314]  Especially mentioned because the guide very often
follows his charges, especially when he intends to play them an
ugly trick. I had an unpleasant adventure of the kind in
Somaliland; but having the fear of the "Aborigines Protection
Society" before my eyes, refrained from doing more than hinting
at it.

[FN#315]  i.e. otherwise than according to ordinance of Allah.

[FN#316]  A well-known city of lrak 'Ajami (or Persian).

[FN#317]  i.e. spare pegs and strings, plectra, thumb-guards,
etc.

[FN#318]  Arab. "Hasir," the fine matting used for sleeping on
during the hot season in Egypt and Syria.

[FN#319]  i.e. The bed where the "rough and tumble" had taken
place.

[FN#320]  This word, which undoubtedly derives from cuculus,
cogul, cocu, a cuckoo, has taken a queer twist, nor can I explain
how its present meaning arose from a shebird which lays her egg
in a strange nest. Wittol, on the other hand, from Witan, to
know, is rightly applied to one whom La Fontaine calls "cocu et
content," the Arab Dayyus.

[FN#321]  Arab. "Shabakah," here a net like a fisherman's, which
is hung over the hole in the wall called a shop, during the
temporary absence of the shopkeeper. See my Pilgrimage, i. 100.

[FN#322]  i.e. of which the singer speaks.

[FN#323]  i.e., she found him good at the to-and-fro movement;
our corresponding phrase is "basket-making."

[FN#324]  Arab. "Mu'arris": in vol. i. 338, 1 derived the word
from 'Ars marriage, like the Germ. Kupplerin. This was a mere
mistake; the root is 'Ars (with a Sad not a Sin) and means a pimp
who shows off or displays his wares.

[FN#325]  Arab. "Akhmitu Ghazla-ha" lit.=thicken her yarn or
thread.

[FN#326]  I must again warn the reader that the negative, which
to us appears unnecessary, is emphatic in Arabic.

[FN#327]  i.e. By removing the goods from the "but" to the "ben."
Pilgrimage i. 99.

[FN#328]  Arab. "Tannur," here the large earthern jar with a
cover of the same material, round which the fire is built.

[FN#329]  Being a musician the hero of the tale was also a
pederast.

[FN#330]  Here Mr. Payne supplies "Then they returned and sat
down" (apparently changing places). He is quite correct in
characterising the Bresl. Edit. as corrupt and "fearfully
incoherent." All we can make certain of in this passage is that
the singer mistook the Persian for his white slave (Mameluke).

[FN#331]  Arab. "Bazaka," normally used in the sense of spitting;
here the saliva might be applied for facilitating insertion.

[FN#332]  In Persian "Award o burd,"=brought and bore away, gen.
applied to the movement of the man as in the couplet,

     Chenin burd o award o award o burd,
     Kih dayeh pas-i-pardeh zi ghussah murd.

     He so came and went, went and came again,
     That Nurse who lay curtained to faint was fain.

[FN#333]  Alluding to the fighting rams which are described by
every Anglo-Indian traveller. They strike with great force, amply
sufficient to crush the clumsy hand which happens to be caught
between the two foreheads. The animals are sometimes used for Fal
or consulting futurity: the name of a friend is given to one and
that of a foe to the other; and the result of the fight suggests
victory or defeat for the men.

[FN#334]  Arab. "Jauhar"=the jewel, the essential nature of a
substance. Compare M. Alcofribas' "Abstraction of the
Quintessence."

[FN#335]  In parts of the Moslem world Al-Jabr=the tyranny, is
the equivalent of what we call "civil law," as opposed to
Al-Shari'ah, or Holy Law, the religious code; Diwan al-Jabr
(Civil Court) being the contrary of the Mahkamah or Kazi's
tribunal. See "First Footsteps in East Africa," p. 126.

[FN#336]  i.e. in offering thee the kingship.

[FN#337]  i.e. "a man of fourscore."

[FN#338]  i.e. outside the city.

[FN#339]  See the conclusion of the story.

[FN#340]  i.e. I have said my say.

[FN#341]  Arab. "Al-Mutabattil," usually=one who forsakes the
world. The Katarat alNaysan or rain-drops in the month Naysan
(April) produce pearls when falling into the oyster-shells and
poison in the serpent's mouth. The allusions to them are
innumerable in Persian poetry, and the idea gives rise to a host
of moralities more or less insipid.

[FN#342]  This is the general idea concerning the diamond in all
countries where the gem is dug, but I never heard it of the
pearl.

[FN#343]  Arab. "Faras," properly a mare; but the writer begins
by using the feminine, and then employs the masculine. It is an
abominable text.

[FN#344]  Arab. "Rutab wa manazil," may also mean "stations and
mansions (of the moon and planets)." The double entendre was
probably intended.

[FN#345]  Arab. "Za-if," still a popular word, meaning feeble,
sick, ailing, but especially, weak in venery.

[FN#346]  See the original of this tale in King Al-Af'a:
Al-Mas'udi, chap. xlvi.

[FN#347]  He says this without any sense of shame, coolly as
Horace or Catullus wrote.

[FN#348]  i.e. of the caravan with which he came.

[FN#349]  Arab. "Al-'Adl." In the form of Zu 'adl it = a legal
witness, a man of good repute; in Marocco and other parts of the
Moslem world 'Adul (plur. 'Udul) signifies an assessor of the
Kazi, a notary. Padre Lerchundy (loc. cit. p. 345) renders it
notario.

[FN#350]  i.e. I would marry thy daughter, not only for her own
sake, but for alliance with thy family.

[FN#351]  i.e. the bride's face.

[FN#352]  The Ghusl or complete ablution after car. cop.

[FN#353]  Thus the girl was made lawful to him as a concubine by
the "loathly ladye," whose good heart redeemed her ill-looks.

[FN#354]  Meaning the poor man and his own daughter.

[FN#355]  Mr. Payne changes the Arab title to the far more
appropriate heading, "Story of the Rich Man and his Wasteful
Son." The tale begins with AEsop's fable of the faggot; and
concludes with the "Heir of Linne," in the famous Scotch ballad.
Mr. Clouston refers also to the Persian Tale of Murchlis (The
Sorrowful Wazir); to the Forty Vezirs (23rd Story) to Cinthio and
to sundry old English chap-books.

[FN#356]  Arab. "Tafrik wa'l-jam'a."

[FN#357]  Arab. "Wafat" pop. used as death, decease, departure;
but containing the idea of departing to the mercy of Allah and
"paying the debt of nature." It is not so illomened a word as
Maut=death.

[FN#358]  i.e. gifts and presents. See vol. iv. 185.

[FN#359]  i.e. Turcomans; presently called Sistan, for which see
vol. ii. 218.

[FN#360]  In my Pilgrimage (i. 38), 1 took from Mr. Galton's Art
of Travel, the idea of opening with a lancet the shoulder or
other fleshy part of the body and inserting into it a precious
stone. This was immensely derided by not a few including one who,
then a young man from the country, presently became a Cabinet
Minister. Despite their omniscience, however, the "dodge" is
frequently practised. See how this device was practised by Jeshua
Nazarenus, vol. v. 238.

[FN#361]  Arab. "'Alam," a pile of stones, a flag or some such
landmark. The reader will find them described in "The Sword of
Midian," i. 98, and passim.

[FN#362]  Mr. Clouston refers to the "Miles Gloriosus" (Plautus);
to "Orlando Innamorato" of Berni (the Daughter of the King of the
Distant Isles); to the "Seven Wise Masters" ("The Two Dreams," or
"The Crafty Knight of Hungary"); to his Book of Sindibad, p. 343
ff.; to Miss Busk's Folk-Lore of Rome, p. 399 ("The Grace of the
Hunchback"); to Prof. Crane's "Italian Popular Tales," p. 167,
and "The Elopement," from Pitre's Sicilian collection.

[FN#363]  In sign of impatience; "Look sharp!"

[FN#364]  i.e. the resemblance of the supposed sister to his
wife. This is a rechauffe of Kamar al-Zaman iid.

[FN#365]  This leaving a long lock upon the shaven poll is a very
ancient practice: we find it amongst the old Egyptians. For the
