ace, supposed by him to
have passed in a dream;" I may add that amongst frolicsome
Eastern despots the adventure might often have happened and that
it might have given a hint to Cervantes.

[FN#2]  i.e., The Wag.  See vol. i. 311: the old version calls
him "the Debauchee."

[FN#3]  Arab. "Al-Fárs"; a people famed for cleverness and
debauchery.  I cannot see why Lane omitted the Persian, unless he
had Persian friends at Cairo.

[FN#4]  i.e., the half he intended for spending-money.

[FN#5]  i.e., "men," a characteristic Arab idiom: here it applies
to the sons of all time.

[FN#6]  i.e., make much of thee.

[FN#7]  In Lane the Caliph is accompanied by "certain of his
domestics."

[FN#8]  Arab.  "Khubz Mutabbak," = bread baked in a platter,
instead of an oven, an earthen jar previously heated, to the
sides of which the scones or bannocks of dough are applied: "it
is lighter than oven-bread, especially if it be made thin and
leavened."  See Al-Shakúrí, a medical writer quoted by Dozy.

[FN#9]  In other parts of The Nights Harun al-Rashid declines
wine-drinking.

[FN#10]  The 'Allámah (doctissimus) Sayce (p. 212, Comparative
Philology, London, Trübner, 1885) goes far back for Khalífah = a
deputy, a successor.  He begins with the Semitic (Hebrew?) root
"Khaliph" = to change, exchange: hence "Khaleph" = agio.  From
this the Greeks got their {Greek} and Cicero his "Collybus," a
money-lender.

[FN#11]  Arab.  "Harfúsh" (in Bresl. Edit. iv. 138, "Kharfúsh"),
in popular parlance a "blackguard."  I have to thank Mr.
Alexander J. Cotheal, of New York, for sending me a MS. Copy of
this tale.

[FN#12]  Arab.  "Ta'ám," in Egypt and Somaliland = millet seed
(Holcus Sorghum) cooked in various ways.  In Barbary it is
applied to the local staff of life, Kuskusú, wheaten or other
flour damped and granulated by hand to the size of peppercorns,
and lastly steamed (as we steam potatoes), the cullender-pot
being placed over a long-necked jar full of boiling water.  It is
served with clarified butter, shredded onions and meat; and it
represents the Risotto of Northern Italy.  Europeans generally
find it too greasy for digestion.  This Barbary staff of life is
of old date and is thus mentioned by Leo Africanus in early sixth
century.  "It is made of a lump of Dow, first set upon the fire,
in a vessel full of holes and afterwards tempered with Butter and
Pottage."  So says good Master John Pory, "A Geographical
Historie of Africa, by John Leo, a Moor," London, 1600, impensis
George Bishop.

[FN#13]  Arab.  "Bi al-Salám" (pron. "Bissalám") = in the Peace
(of Allah).

[FN#14]  And would bring him bad luck if allowed to go without
paying.

[FN#15]  i.e., of the first half, as has been shown.

[FN#16]  Arab.  "Kumájah" from the Persian Kumásh = bread
unleavened and baked in ashes.  Egyptians use the word for
bannocks of fine flour.

[FN#17]  Arab.  "Kalí," our "alcali" ; for this and other
abstergents see vol. i. 279.

[FN#18]  These lines have occurred twice in vol. i. 117 (Night
xii.); I quote Mr. Payne.

[FN#19]  Arab.  "Yá 'llah, yá 'lláh;" vulg. Used for "Look
sharp!" e.g., "Yá 'llah jári, yá walad" = Be off at once, boy."

[FN#20]  Arab.  "Banj akrítashí," a term which has occurred
before.

[FN#21]  A natural clock, called West Africans Cokkerapeek =
Cock-speak.  All the world over it is the subject of
superstition: see Giles's "Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio"
(i. 177), where Miss Li, who is a devil, hears a cock crow and
vanishes.

[FN#22]  In Lane Al-Rashid "found at the door his young men
waiting for him and ordered them to convey Abu-l-Hasan upon a
mule and returned to the palace; Abu-l-Hasan being intoxicated
and insensible.  And when the Khaleefah had rested himself in the
palace, he called for," etc.

[FN#23]  Arab.  "Kursi," Assyrian "Kussú" = throne; and "Korsái"
in Aramaic (or Nabathean as Al-Mas'udi calls it), the second
growth-period of the "Semitic" family, which supplanted Assyrian
and Babylonian, and became, as Arabic now is, the common speech
of the "Semitic" world.

[FN#24]  Arab.  "Makán mahjúb," which Lane renders by "a private
closet," and Payne by a "privy place," suggesting that the Caliph
slept in a numéro cent.  So, when starting for the "Trakki
Campaign," Sir Charles Napier (of Sind), in his zeal for
lightening officers' baggage, inadvertently chose a water-closet
tent for his head-quarters--magno cum risu not of the staff, who
had a strange fear of him, but of the multitude who had not.

[FN#25]  Arab.  "Dar al-Salam," one of the seven "Gardens" into
which the Mohammedan Paradise is divided.  Man's fabled happiness
began in a Garden (Eden) and the suggestion came naturally that
it would continue there.  For the seven Heavens, see vol. viii.,
111.

[FN#26]  Branch of Pearl, see vol. ii. 57.

[FN#27]  Arab.  "Kahbah," the lowest word (vol. i. 70),
effectively used in contrast with the speaker's surroundings.

[FN#28]  Arab.  "Yá kabírí," =  mon brave, my good man.

[FN#29]  This exaggeration has now become familiar to English
poets.

[FN#30]  Like an Eastern he goes to the water-closet the first
thing in the morning, or rather dawn, and then washes
ceremonially before saying the first prayer.  In Europe he would
probably wait until after breakfast.  See vol. iii. 242.

[FN#31]  I have explained why an Eastern does not wash in the
basin as Europeans do in vol. i. p. 241.

[FN#32]  i.e., He was confused that he forgot.  All Moslems know
how to pray, whether they pray or not.

[FN#33]  The dawn-prayer consists of only four inclinations
(raka'at); two "Farz" (divinely appointed), and two Sunnah (the
custom of the Apostle).  For the Raka'áh see Lane, M.E. chapt.
iii.; it cannot be explained without illustrations.

[FN#34]  After both sets of prayers, Farz and Sunnah, the Moslem
looks over his right shoulder and says, "The Peace (of Allah) be
upon you and the ruth of Allah," and repeats the words over the
left shoulder. The salutation is addressed to the Guardian Angels
or to the bystanders (Moslems), who, however, do not return it.

[FN#35]  i.e., Ibrahim of Mosul the musician.  See vol. iv. 108.

[FN#36]  Arab.  "Líyúth" plur. of "layth," a lion: here warriors
are meant.

[FN#37]  The Abbasides traced their descent from Al-Abbas,
Mohammed's uncle, and justly held themselves as belonging to the
family of the Prophet.  See vol. ii. 61.

[FN#38]  Arab. "Nímshah" = "half-sword."  See vol. ii. p. 193.

[FN#39]  i.e., May thy dwelling-place never fall into ruin.  The
prayer has, strange to say, been granted. "The present city on
the eastern bank of the Tigris was built by Haroun al-Rashid, and
his house still stands there and is an object of reverent
curiosity."  So says my friend Mr. Grattan Geary (vol. i. p. 212,
"Through Asiatic Turkey," London: Low, 1878).  He also gives a
sketch of Zubaydah's tomb on the western bank of the Tigris near
the suburb which represents old Baghdad; it is a pineapple dome
springing from an octagon, both of brick once revetted with white
stucco.

[FN#40]  In the Bresl. Edit. four hundred.  I prefer the
exaggerated total.

[FN#41]  i.e., the raised recess at the upper end of an Oriental
saloon, and the place of honour, which Lane calls by its Egyptian
name "Líwán."  See his vol. i. 312 and his M.E. chapt. i.: also
my vol. iv. p. 71.

[FN#42]  "Bit o'Musk."

[FN#43]  "A gin," a snare.

[FN#44]  "A gift," a present.  It is instructive to compare Abu
al-Hasan with Sancho Panza, sprightly Arab wit with grave Spanish
humour.

[FN#45]  i.e., he fell down senseless.  The old version has "his
head knocked against his knees."

[FN#46]  Arab.  "Waddi" vulg. Egyptian and Syrian for the
classical "Addí" (ii. of Adú = preparing to do).  No wonder that
Lane complains (iii. 376) of the vulgar style, abounding in
errors."

[FN#47]  O Apple, O Repose o' Hearts, O Musk, O Choice Gift.

[FN#48]  Arab.  "Doghrí," a pure Turkish word, in Egypt meaning
"truly, with truth," straightforwardly; in Syria = straight
(going), directly.

[FN#49]  Arab.  "Máristán," see vol. i. 288.

[FN#50]  The scene is a rechauffé of Badr al-Din Hasan and his
wife, i. 247.

[FN#51]  Arab.  "Janzír," another atrocious vulgarism for
"Zanjír," which however, has occurred before.

[FN#52]  Arab.  "Arafshah."

[FN#53]  In the "Mishkát al-Masábih" (ii. 341), quoted by Lane,
occurs the Hadis, "Shut your doors anights and when so doing
repeat the Basmalah; for the Devil may not open a door shut in
Allah's name."  A pious Moslem in Egypt always ejaculates, "In
the name of Allah, the Compassionating," etc., when he locks a
door, covers up bread, doffs his clothes, etc., to keep off
devils and dæmons.

[FN#54]  An Arab idiom meaning, "I have not found thy good
fortune (Ka'b = heel, glory, prosperity) do me any good."

[FN#55]  Arab.  "Yá Nakbah" = a calamity to those who have to do
with thee!

[FN#56]  Koran cxii., the "Chapter of Unity."  See vol. iii. 307

[FN#57]  See vol. iii. 222.

[FN#58]  Here the author indubitably speaks for himself,
forgetting that he ended Night cclxxxi. (Bresl. Iv. 168), and
began that following with Shahrazad's usual formula.

[FN#59]  i.e., "Delight of the vitals" (or heart).

[FN#60]  The trick is a rechauffé of the trick played on Al-
Rashid and Zubaydah.

[FN#61]  "Kalb" here is not heart, but stomach.  The big toes of
the Moslem corpse are still tied in most countries, and in some a
sword is placed upon the body; but I am not aware that a knife
and sale (both believed to repel evil spirits) are so used in
Cairo.

[FN#62]  The Moslem, who may not wear unmixed silk during his
lifetime, may be shrouded in it.  I have noted that the
"Shukkah," or piece, averages six feet in length.

[FN#63]  A vulgar ejaculation; the "hour" referring either to
birth or to his being made one of the Caliph's equerries.

[FN#64]  Here the story-teller omits to say that Masrúr bore
witness to the Caliph's statement.

[FN#65]  Arab.  "Wa kuntu ráihah ursil warák," the regular Fellah
language.

[FN#66]  Arab.  "'Irk al-Háshimí."  See vol. ii. 19.  Lane
remarks, "Whether it was so in Hashim himself (or only in his
descendants), I do not find; but it is mentioned amongst the
characteristics of his great-grandson, the Prophet."

[FN#67]  Arab.  "Bostán al-Nuzhah," whose name made the stake
appropriate.  See vol. ii. 81.

[FN#68]  Arab.  "Tamásíl" = generally carved images, which,
amongst Moslem, always suggest idols and idolatry.

[FN#69]  The "Shubbák" here would be the "Mashrabiyah," or
latticed balcony, projecting from the saloon-wall, and containing
room for three or more sitters.  It is Lane's "Mesrebeeyeh,"
sketched in M.E. (Introduction) and now has become familiar to
Englishmen.

[FN#70]  This is to show the cleverness of Abu al-Hasan, who had
calculated upon the difference between Al-Rashid and Zubaydah.
Such marvels of perspicacity are frequent enough in the folk-lore
of the Arabs.

[FN#71]  An artful touch, showing how a tale grows by repetition.
In Abu al-Hasan's case (infra) the eyes are swollen by the
swathes.

[FN#72]  A Hadis attributed to the Prophet, and very useful to
Moslem husbands when wives differ overmuch with them in opinion.

[FN#73]  Arab. "Masarat fí-há," which Lane renders, "And she
threw money to her."

[FN#74]  A saying common throughout the world, especially when
the afflicted widow intends to marry again at the first
opportunity.

[FN#75]  Arab. "Yá Khálati" = O my mother's sister; addressed by
a woman to an elderly dame.

[FN#76]  i.e., That I may put her to shame.

[FN#77]  Arab.  "Zalábiyah."

[FN#78]  Arab.  "Alá al-Kaylah," which Mr. Payne renders by
"Siesta-carpet."  Land reads "Kiblah" ("in the direction of the
Kiblah") and notes that some Moslems turn the corpse's head
towards Meccah and others the right side, including the face.  So
the old version reads "feet towards Mecca."  But the preposition
"Alá" requires the former sig.

[FN#79]  Many places in this text are so faulty that translation
is mere guess-work; e.g. "Bashárah" can hardly be applied to ill-
news.

[FN#80]  i.e. of grief for his loss.

[FN#81]  Arab.  "Tobáni" which Lane renders "two clods."  I have
noted that the Tob (Span. Adobe = Al-Tob) is a sunbaked brick.
Beating the bosom with such material is still common amongst
Moslem mourners of the lower class, and the hardness of the blow
gives the measure of the grief.

[FN#82]  i.e. of grief for her loss.

[FN#83]  Arab.  "Ihtirák" often used in the metaphorical sense of
consuming, torturing.

[FN#84]  Arab.  "Haláwat," lit.=a sweetmeat, a gratuity, a thank-
offering.

[FN#85]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vi. Pp. 182-188, Nights ccccxxxii.-
ccccxxxiv.

[FN#86]  "The good Caliph" and the fifth of the Orthodox, the
other four being Abu Bakr, Omar, Osman and Ali; and omitting the
eight intervening, Hasan the grandson of the Prophet included.
He was the 13th Caliph and 8th Ommiade A.H. 99-101 (=717-720) and
after a reign of three years he was poisoned by his kinsmen of
the Banu Umayyah who hated him for his piety, asceticism, and
severity in making them disgorge their ill-gotten gains.  Moslem
historians are unanimous in his praise.  Europeans find him an
anachorète couronné, à froide et respectable figure, who lacked
the diplomacy of Mu'awiyah and the energy of Al-Hajjáj.  His
principal imitator was Al-Muhtadi bi'lláh, who longed for a
return to the rare old days of Al-Islam.

[FN#87]  Omar 'Adi bin Artah; governor of Kufah and Basrah under
"the good Caliph."

[FN#88]  Jarír al-Khatafah, one of the most famous of the
"Islámí" poets, i.e. those who wrote in the first century (A.H.)
before the corruption of language began.  (See Terminal Essay, p.
230).  Ibn Khallikan notices him at full length i. 294.

[FN#89]  Arab. "Bákiyah," which may also mean eternal as opposed
to "Fániyah" = temporal.  Omar's answer shows all the narrow-
minded fanaticism which distinguished the early Moslems: they
were puritanical as any Praise-God-Barebones, and they hated
"boetry and bainting" as hotly as any Hanoverian.

[FN#90]  The Saturday Review (Jan. 2, '86), which has honoured me
by the normal reviling in the shape of a critique upon my two
first vols., complains of the "Curious word Abhak" as "a
perfectly arbitrary and unusual group of Latin letters."  May I
ask Aristarchus how he would render "Sal'am" (vol ii. 24), which
apparently he would confine to "Arabic MSS."(!).  Or would he
prefer A(llah) b(less) h(im) a(nd) k(eep) "W.G.B." (whom God
bless) as proposed by the editor of Ockley?  But where would be
the poor old "Saturnine" if obliged to do better than the authors
it abuses?

[FN#91]  He might have said "by more than one, including the
great Labíd."

[FN#92]  Fí-hi either "in him" (Mohammed) or "in it" (his
action).

[FN#93]  Chief of the Banu Sulaym.  According to Tabari, Abbas
bin Mirdas (a well-known poet), being dissatisfied with the booty
allotted to him by the Prophet, refused it and lampooned
Mohammed, who said to Ali, "Cut off this tongue which attacketh
me," i.e. "Silence him by giving what will satisfy him."
Thereupon Ali doubled the Satirist's share.

[FN#94]  Arab.  "Yá Bilál": Bilal ibn Rabah was the Prophet's
freedman and crier: see vol. iii. 106.  But bilal also signifies
"moisture" or "beneficence," "benefits": it may be intended for a
double entendre but I prefer the metonymy.

[FN#95]  The verses of this Kasidah are too full of meaning to be
easily translated: it is fine old poetry.

[FN#96]  i.e. of the Koraysh tribe.  For his disorderly life see
Ibn Khallikan ii. 372: he died, however, a holy death, battling
against the Infidels in A.H. 93 (= 711-12), some five years
before Omar's reign.

[FN#97]  Arab.  "Bayn farsi-k wa 'l-damí" = lit. between fæces
and menses, i.e., the foulest part of his mistress's person.  It
is not often that The Nights are "nasty"; but here is a case.
See vol. v. 162.

[FN#98]  "Jamil the Poet," and lover of Buthaynah: see vol. ii.
102, Ibn Khallikan (i.331), and Al-Mas'udi vi. 381, who quotes
him copiously.  He died A.H. 82 (= 701), or sixteen years before
Omar's reign.

[FN#99]  Arab.  "Safíh" = the slab over the grave.

[FN#100]  A contemporary and friend of Jamíl and the famous lover
of Azzah.  See vol. ii. 102, and Al-Mas'udi, vi. 426.  The word
"Kuthayyir" means "the dwarf."  Term. Essay, 231.

[FN#101]  i.e. in the attitude of prayer.

[FN#102]  In Bresl. Edit.  "Al-Akhwass," clerical error, noticed
in Ibn Khallikan i. 526.  His satires banished him to Dahlak
Island in the Red Sea, and he died A.H. 179 (= 795-96).

[FN#103]  Another famous poet Abú Firás Hammám or Humaym (dimin.
Form), as debauched as Jarir, who died forty days before him in
A.H. 110 (= 728-29), as Basrah.  Cf. Term. Essay, 231.

[FN#104]  A famous Christian poet.  See C. de Perceval, Journ.
Asiat. April, 1834, Ibn Khallikan iii. 136, and Term. Essay, 231.

[FN#105]  The poet means that unlike other fasters he eats meat
openly.  See Pilgrimage (i. 110), for the popular hypocrisy.

[FN#106]  Arab.  "Bathá" the lowlands and plains outside the
Meccan Valley.  See al-Mas'udi, vi. 157.  Mr. (now Sir) W. Muir
in his Life of Mahomet, vol. i., p. ccv., remarks upon my
Pilgrimage (iii.252) that in placing Arafat 12 miles from Meccah,
I had given 3 miles to Muna, + 3 to Muzdalifah + 3 to Arafat = 9.
But the total does not include the suburbs of Meccah and the
breadth of the Arafat-Valley.

[FN#107]  The words of the Azán, vol. i. 306.

[FN#108]  Wine in Arabic is feminine, "Shamúl" = liquor hung in
the wind to cool, a favourite Arab practice often noticed by the
poets.

[FN#109]  i.e. I will fall down dead drunk.

[FN#110]  Arab.  "Árám," plur. of Irm, a beautiful girl, a white
deer.  The word is connected with the Heb. Reem (Deut. xxxiii.
17), which has been explained unicorn, rhinoceros, and aurochs.
It is at the Ass. Rimu, the wild bull of the mountains, provided
with a human face, and placed at the palace-entrance to frighten
away foes, demon or human.

[FN#111]  i.e. she who ensnares [all]  eyes.

[FN#112]  Imam, the spiritual title of the Caliph, as head of the
Faith and leader (lit. "foreman," Antistes) of the people at
prayer.  See vol. iv. 111.

[FN#113]  For Yamámah see vol. ii. 104.  Omar bin Abd-al-Aziz was
governor of the province before he came to the Caliphate.  To the
note on Zarká, the blue-eyed Yamamite, I may add that Marwan was
called Ibn Zarká, son of "la femme au drapeu bleu," such being
the sign of a public prostitute.  Al-Mas'udi, v. 509.

[FN#114]  Rain and bounty, I have said, are synonymous.

[FN#115]  About £4.

[FN#116]  i.e. what is thy news.

[FN#117]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vi. pp. 188-9, Night ccccxxxiv.

[FN#118]  Of this masterful personage and his energie indomptable
I have spoken in vol. iv. 3, and other places.  I may add that he
built Wásit city A.H. 83 and rendered eminent services to
literature and civilization amongst the Arabs.  When the Ommiade
Caliph Abd al-Malik was dying he said to his son Walid, "Look to
Al-Hajjaj and honour him for, verily, he it is who hath covered
for you the pulpits; and he is thy sword and thy right hand
against all opponents; thou needest him more than he needeth
thee, and when I die summon the folk to the covenant of
allegiance; and he who saith with his head--thus, say thou with
thy sword--thus" (Al-Siyuti, p 225) yet the historian simply
observes, "the Lord curse him."

[FN#119]  i.e. given through his lieutenant.

[FN#120]  "Necks" per synecdochen for heads.  The passage is a
description of a barber-surgeon in a series of double-entendres
the "nose-pierced" (Makhzúm) is the subject who is led by the
nose like a camel with halter and ring and the "breaker" (háshim)
may be a breaker of bread as the word originally meant, or
breaker of bones.  Lastly the "wealth" (mál) is a recondite
allusion to the hair.

[FN#121]  Arab.  "Kadr" which a change of vowel makes "Kidr" = a
cooking-pot.  The description is that of an itinerant seller of
boiled beans (Fúl mudammas) still common in Cairo.  The "light of
his fire" suggests a double-entendre some powerful Chief like
masterful King Kulayb.  See vol. ii. 77.

[FN#122]  Arab.  "Al-Sufúf," either ranks of fighting-men or the
rows of thread on a loom.  Here the allusion is to a weaver who
levels and corrects his threads with the wooden spate and shuttle
governing warp and weft and who makes them stand straight (behave
aright).  The "stirrup" (rikáb) is the loop of cord in which the
weaver's foot rests.

[FN#123]  "Adab."  See vols. i. 132, and ix. 41.

[FN#124]  Bresl. Edit., vol. vi. pp. 189-191, Night ccccxxxiv.

[FN#125]  Arab.  "Za'mú," a word little used in the Cal., Mac. or
Bul. Edit.; or in the Wortley Montague MS.; but very common in
the Bresl. text.

[FN#126]  More double-entendres.  "Thou hast done justice"
('adalta) also means "Thou hast swerved from right;" and "Thou
hast wrought equitably" (Akasta iv. of Kast) = "Thou hast
transgressed."

[FN#127]  Koran vi. 44.  Allah is threatening unbelievers, "And
when they had forgotten their warnings We set open to them the
gates of all things, until, when they were gladdened," etc.

[FN#128]  Arab.  "Ta'dilú," also meaning, "Ye do injustice":
quoted from Koran iv. 134.

[FN#129]  Arab.  "Al-Kásitúna," before explained.  Koran lxxii.
15.

[FN#130]  Bresl. Edit. vol. vi. pp. 191-343, Nights ccccxxxv-
cccclxxxvii. This is the old Persian Bakhtyár Námeh, i.e., the
Book of Bakhtyar, so called from the prince and hero "Fortune's
Friend." In the tale of Jili'ad and Shimas the number of Wazirs
is seven, as usual in the Sindibad cycle. Here we have the full
tale as advised by the Imám al-Jara'í: "it is meet for a man
before entering upon important undertakings to consult ten
intelligent friends; if he have only five to apply twice to each;
if only one, ten times at different visits, and if none, let him
repair to his wife and consult her; and whatever she advises him
to do let him do the clear contrary" (quoting Omar), or as says
Tommy Moore,

          Whene'er you're in doubt, said a sage I once knew,
          'Twixt two lines of conduct which course to pursue,
          Ask a woman's advice, and whate'er she advise
          Do the very reverse, and you're sure to be wise.

The Romance of the Ten Wazirs occurs in dislocated shape in the
"Nouveaux Contes Arabes, ou Supplément aux Mille et une Nuits,"
etc., par M. l'Abbé * * * Paris, 1788. It is the "Story of
Bohetzad (Bakht-zád=Luck-born, v.p.), and his Ten Viziers," in
vol. iii., pp. 2-30 of the "Arabian Tales," etc., published by
Dom Chavis and M. Cazotte, in 1785; a copy of the English
translation by Robert Heron, Edinburgh, 1792, I owe to the
kindness of Mr. Leonard Smithers of Sheffield. It appears also in
vol. viii. of M. C. de Perceval's Edition of The Nights; in
Gauttier's Edition (vol. vi.), and as the "Historia Decem
Vizirorum et filii Regis Azad-bacht," text and translation by
Gustav Knös, of Goettingen (1807). For the Turkish, Malay and
other versions see (p. xxxviii. etc.) "The Bakhtiy r N ma," etc.
Edited (from the Sir William. Ouseley version of 1801) by Mr. W.
A. Clouston and privately printed, London, 1883. The notes are
valuable but their worth is sadly injured by the want of an
index. I am pleased to see that Mr. E. J. W. Gibb is publishing
the "History of the Forty Vezirs; or, the Story of the Forty
Morns and Eves," written in Turkish by "Sheykh-Zadah," evidently
a nom de plume (for Ahmad al-Misri?), and translated from an
Arabic MS. which probably dated about the xvth century.

[FN#131]  In Chavis and Cazotte, the "kingdom of Dineroux
(comprehending all Syria and the isles of the Indian Ocean) whose
capital was Issessara." An article in the Edinburgh Review (July,
1886), calls the "Supplement" a "bare-faced forgery"; but
evidently the writer should have "read up" his subject before
writing.

[FN#132]  The Persian form; in Arab. Sijistán, the classical
Drangiana or province East of Fars=Persia proper. It is famed in
legend as the feof of hero Rustam.

[FN#133]  Arab. Ráwi=a professional tale-teller, which Mr. Payne
justly holds to be a clerical error for "Rái, a beholder, one who
seeth."

[FN#134]  In Persian the name would be Bahr-i-Jaur="luck" (or
fortune, "bahr") of Jaur- (or Júr-) city.

[FN#135]  Supply "and cared naught for his kingdom."

[FN#136]  Arab. "Atráf," plur. of "Tarf," a great and liberal
lord.

[FN#137]  Lit. "How was," etc. Kayf is a favourite word not only
in the Bresl. Edit., but throughout Egypt and Syria. Classically
we should write "Má;" vulgarly "Aysh."

[FN#138]  Karmania vulg. and fancifully derived from Kirmán
Pers.=worms because the silkworm is supposed to have been bred
there; but the name is of far older date as we find the Asiatic
Aethiopians of Herodotus (iii. 93) lying between the Germanii
(Karman) and the Indus. Also Karmanía appears in Strabo and Sinus
Carmanicus in other classics.

[FN#139]  Arab. "Ka'íd"; lit.=one who sits with, a colleague,
hence the Span. Alcayde; in Marocco it is=colonel, and is
prefixed e.g. Ka'íd Maclean.

[FN#140]  A favourite food; Al-Hariri calls the dates and cream,
which were sold together in bazars, the "Proud Rider on the
desired Steed."

[FN#141]  In Bresl. Edit. vi. 198 by misprint "Kutrú": Chavis and
Cazotte have "Kassera." In the story of Bihkard we find a P.N.
"Yatrú."

[FN#142]  i.e. waylaying travellers, a term which has often
occurred.

[FN#143]  i.e. the royal favour.

[FN#144]  i.e. When the fated hour came down (from Heaven).

[FN#145]  As the Nights have proved in many places, the Asl
(origin) of a man is popularly held to influence his conduct
throughout life. So the Jeweller's wife (vol. ix.) was of servile
birth, which accounted for her vile conduct; and reference is
hardly necessary to a host of other instances. We can trace the
same idea in the sayings and folk-lore of the West, e.g. Bon sang
ne peut mentir, etc., etc.

[FN#146]  i.e. "What deemest thou he hath done?"

[FN#147]  The apodosis wanting "to make thee trust in him?"

[FN#148]  In the Braj Bákhá dialect of Hindi, we find quoted in
the Akhlák-i-Hindi, "Tale of the old Tiger and the Traveller":--

     Jo jáko paryo subháo jáe ná jío-sun;
     Ním na mitho hoe sichh gur ghio sun.

     Ne'er shall his nature fall a man whate'er that nature be,
     The Ním-tree bitter shall remain though drenched with Gur
               and Ghí.

The Ním (Melia Azadirachta) is the "Persian lilac" whose leaves,
intensely bitter, are used as a preventive to poison: Gur is the
Anglo-Indian Jaggeri=raw sugar and Ghi clarified butter. Roebuck
gives the same proverb in Hindostani.

[FN#149]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Kaskas; or the
Obstinate Man." For ill-luck, see Miss Frere's "Old Deccan Days"
(p. 171), and Giles's "Strange Stories," &c. (p. 430), where the
young lady says to Ma, "You often asked me for money; but on
account of your weak luck I hitherto refrained from giving it."

[FN#150]  True to life in the present day, as many a standing
hay-rick has shown.

[FN#151]  The "Munajjim" is a recognised authority in Egyptian
townlets, and in the village republics of Southern India the
"Jyoshi" is one of the paid officials.

[FN#152]  Arab. "Amín" sub. and adj. In India it means a
Government employé who collects revenue; in Marocco a
commissioner sent by His Sharifian Majesty.

[FN#153]  Our older word for divers=Arab "Ghawwásún": a single
pearl (in the text Jauhar=the Port. AIjofar) is called
"habbah"=grain or seed.

[FN#154]  The kindly and generous deed of one Moslem to another,
and by no means rare in real life.

[FN#155]  "Eunuch," etymologically meaning chamberlain (     +
     ), a bed-chamber-servant or slave, was presently confined to
castrated men found useful for special purposes, like gelded
horses, hounds, and cockerels turned to capons. Some writers hold
that the creation of the semivir or apocopus began as a
punishment in Egypt and elsewhere; and so under the Romans
amputation of the "peccant part" was frequent: others trace the
Greek "invalid," i.e., impotent man, to marital jealousy, and not
a few to the wife who wished to use the sexless for hard work in
the house without danger to the slave-girls.  The origin of the
mutilation is referred by Ammianus Marcellinus (lib. iv. chap.
17), and the Classics generally, to Semiramis, an "ancient queen"
of decidedly doubtful epoch, who thus prevented the propagation
of weaklings. But in Genesis (xxxvii. 36; xxxix. 1, margin) we
find Potiphar termed a "Sarím" (castrato), an "extenuating
circumstance" for Mrs. P. Herodotus (iii. chap. 48) tells us that
Periander, tyrant of Corinth, sent three hundred Corcyrean boys
to Alyattes for castration              , and that Panionios of
Chios sold caponised lads for high prices (viii. 105): he notices
(viii. 104 and other places) that eunuchs "of the Sun, of Heaven,
of the hand of God," were looked upon as honourable men amongst
the Persians whom Stephanus and Brissonius charge with having
invented the name (Dabistan i. 171). Ctesias also declares that
the Persian kings were under the influence of eunuchs. In the
debauched ages of Rome the women found a new use for these
effeminates, who had lost only the testes or testiculi=the
witnesses (of generative force): it is noticed by Juvenal (i. 22;
ii. 365-379; vi. 366)

        --sunt quos imbelles et mollia semper
Oscula delectant.

So Martial,

          --vult futui Gallia, non parere,

And Mirabeau knew (see Kadísah) "qu'ils mordent les femmes et les
liment avec une précieuse continuité." (Compare my vol. ii. 90;
v. 46.) The men also used them as catamites (Horace i. Od.
xxxvii.).

          "Contaminato cum grege turpium,
            Morbo virorum."

In religion the intestabilis or intestatus was held ill-omened,
and not permitted to become a priest (Seneca Controv. ii. 4), a
practice perpetuated in the various Christian churches. The
manufacture was forbidden, to the satisfaction of Martial, by
Domitian, whose edict Nero confirmed; and was restored by the
Byzantine empire, which advanced eunuchs, like Eutropius and
Narses, to the highest dignities of the realm. The cruel custom
to the eternal disgrace of mediaeval Christianity was revived in
Rome for providing the choirs in the Sistine Chapel and elsewhere
with boys' voices. Isaiah mentions the custom (Ivi. 3-6).
Mohammed, who notices in the Koran (xxiv. 31), "such men as
attend women and have no need of women," i.e., "have no natural
force," expressly forbade (iv. 118), "changing Allah's
creatures," referring, say the commentators, to superstitious
earcropping of cattle, tattooing, teeth-sharpening, sodomy,
tribadism, and slave-gelding. See also the "Hidáyah," vol. iv.
121; and the famous divine AI-Siyúti, the last of his school,
wrote a tractate Fi 'I-Tahrími Khidmati 'I-Khisyán=on the
illegality of using eunuchs. Yet the Harem perpetuated the
practice throughout AI-Islam and African jealousy made a gross
abuse of it. To quote no other instance, the Sultan of Dár-For
had a thousand eunuchs under a Malik or king, and all the chief
offices of the empire, such as Ab (father) and Báb (door), were
monopolised by these neutrals. The centre of supply was the Upper
Nile, where the operation was found dangerous after the age of
fifteen, and when badly performed only one in four survived. For
this reason, during the last century the Coptic monks of Girgah
and Zawy al-Dayr, near Assiout, engaged in this scandalous
traffic, and declared that it was philanthropic to operate
scientifically (Prof. Panuri and many others). Eunuchs are now
made in the Sudán, Nubia, Abyssinia, Kordofán, and Dár-For,
especially the Messalmiyah district: one of those towns was
called "Tawáshah" (eunuchry) from the traffic there conducted by
Fukahá or religious teachers. Many are supplied by the district
between Majarah (Majarash?) and the port Masawwah; there are also
depôts at Mbadr, near Tajurrah-harbour, where Yusuf Bey, Governor
in 1880, caponised some forty boys, including the brother of a
hostile African chief: here also the well-known Abu Bakr was
scandalously active. It is calculated that not less than eight
thousand of these unfortunates are annually exported to Arabia,
Egypt, and Turkey. Article IV. of the AngIo-Egyptian Convention
punishes the offense with death, and no one would object to
hanging the murderer under whose mutilating razor a boy dies. Yet
this, like most of our modern "improvements" in Egypt, is a mere
brutum fulmen. The crime is committed under our very eyes, but we
will not see it.

The Romans numbered three kinds of eunuchs:--1. Castrati,
clean-shaved, from Gr.       ; 2. Spadones, from     , when the
testicles are torn out, not from "Spada," town of Persia; and, 3.
Thlibii, from      , to press, squeeze, when the testicles are
bruised, &c. In the East also, as I have stated (v. 46), eunuchs
are of three kinds:--1. Sandali, or the clean-shaved, the
classical apocopus. The parts are swept off by a single cut of a
razor, a tube (tin or wooden) is set in the urethra, the wound is
cauterised with boiling oil, and the patient is planted in a
fresh dunghill. His diet is milk; and if under puberty, he often
survives. This is the eunuque aqueduc, who must pass his water
through a tube. 2. The eunuch whose penis is removed: he retains
all the power of copulation and procreation without the
wherewithal; and this, since the discovery of caoutchouc, has
often been supplied. 3. The eunuch, or classical Thlibias and
Semivir, who has been rendered sexless by removing the testicles
(as the priests of Cybele were castrated with a stone knife), or
by bruising (the Greek Thlásias), twisting, searing, or bandaging
them. A more humane process has lately been introduced: a
horsehair is tied round the neck of the scrotum and tightened by
slow degrees till the circulation of the part stops and the bag
drops off without pain. This has been adopted in sundry Indian
regiments of Irregular Cavalry, and it succeeded admirably: the
animals rarely required a day's rest. The practice was known to
the ancients. See notes on Kadísah in Mirabeau. The Eunuchata
virgo was invented by the Lydians, according to their historian
Xanthus. Zachias (Quaest. medico-legal.) declares that the
process was one of infibulation or simple sewing up the vulva;
but modern experience has suggested an operation like the
"spaying" of bitches, or mutilation of the womb, in modern
euphuism "baby-house." Dr. Robert ("Journey from Delhi to Bombay,
Müller's Archiv. 1843") speaks of a eunuch'd woman who after
ovariotomy had no breasts, no pubes, no rotundities, and no
desires. The Australians practice exsection of the ovaries
systematically to make women barren. Miklucho Maclay learned from
the traveller Retsch that about Lake Parapitshurie men's urethras
were split, and the girls were spayed: the latter showing two
scars in the groin. They have flat bosoms, but feminine forms,
and are slightly bearded; they mix with the men, whom they
satisfy mechanically, but without enjoyment (?). MacGillivray, of
the "Rattlesnake," saw near Cape York a woman with these scars:
she was a surdo-mute, and had probably been spayed to prevent
increase. The old Scandinavians, from Norway to Iceland,
systematically gelded "sturdy vagrants" in order that they might
not beget bastards. The Hottentots before marriage used to cut
off the left testicle, meaning by such semi-castration to prevent
the begetting of twins. This curious custom, mentioned by the
Jesuit Tochard, Boeving, and Kolbe, is now apparently obsolete--
at least, the traveller Fritsch did not find it.

[FN#156]  Arab. "Harám"="forbidden," sinful.

[FN#157]  In Chavis and Cazotte, who out-galland'd Galland in
transmogrifying the Arabic, this is the "Story of Illage
(AI-Hájj) Mahomet and his sons; or, the Imprudent Man." The tale
occurs in many forms and with great modifications. See, for
instance, the Gesta Romanorum "Of the miraculous recall of
sinners and of the consolation which piety offers to the
distressed," the adventures of the knight Placidus, vol. ii. 99.
Charles Swan, London. Rivington, 1824.

[FN#158]  i.e. For fear of the "eye"; see vol. i. 123 and passim.
In these days the practice is rare; but, whenever you see at
Cairo an Egyptian dame daintily dressed and leading by the hand a
grimy little boy whose eyes are black with flies and whose dress
is torn and unclean, you see what has taken its place. And if you
would praise the brat you must not say "Oh, what a pretty boy!"
but "Inshallah!"--the Lord doth as he pleaseth.

[FN#159]  The adoption of slave lads and lasses was and is still
common among Moslems.

[FN#160]  I have elsewhere noted this "pathetic fallacy" which is
a lieu commun of Eastern folk-lore and not less frequently used
in the mediaeval literature of Europe before statistics were
invented.

[FN#161]  Arab. "Yaskut min 'Aynayh," lit.=fall from his two
eyes, lose favour.

[FN#162]  i.e. killing a man.

[FN#163]  i.e. we can slay him whenever we will.

[FN#164]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Abosaber the Patient."
"Abú-Sábir" would mean "Father of the Patient (one)."

[FN#165]  Arab. "Dihkán," in Persian a villager; but here
something more, a villageelder or chief. AI-Mas'udi (chap.
xxiv.), and other historians apply the term to a class of noble
Persians descended from the ten sons of Wahkert, the
first,"Dihkán," the fourth generation from King Kayomars.

[FN#166]  Reminding one not a little of certain anecdotes anent
Quakers, current in England and English-speaking lands.

[FN#167]  Arab. "Karyah," a word with a long history. The root
seems to be Karaha, he met; in Chald. Karih and Kária (emphatic
Kárita)=a town or city; and in Heb. Kirjath, Kiryáthayim, etc. We
find it in Carthage= Kartá hádisah, or New Town as opposed to
Utica (Atíkah)=Old Town; in Carchemish and in a host of similar
compounds. In Syria and Egypt Kariyah, like Kafr, now means a
hamlet, a village.

[FN#168]  i.e. wandering at a venture.

[FN#169]  Arab. "Sakhrah," the old French Corvée, and the "Begár"
of India.

[FN#170]  Arab. "Matmúrah:" see vol. ii. 39, where it was used as
an "underground cell." The word is extensively used in the
Maghrib or Western Africa.

[FN#171]  Arab. "Yá Abá Sábir." There are five vocative particles
in Arabic; "Yá," common to the near and far; "Ayá" (ho!) and
"Hayá" (holla!) addressed to the far, and "Ay" and "A"
(A-'Abda-lláhi, O Abdullah), to those near. All govern the
accusative of a noun in construction in the literary language
only; and the vulgar use none but the first named. The
English-speaking races neglect the vocative particle, and I never
heard it except in the Southern States of the AngloAmerican
Union=Oh, Mr. Smith.

[FN#172]  He was not honest enough to undeceive them; a neat
Quaker-like touch.

[FN#173]  Here the oath is justified; but the reader will have
remarked that the name of Allah is often taken in vain. Moslems,
however, so far from holding this a profanation deem it an
acknowledgment of the Omnipotence and Omnipresence. The Jews from
whom the Christians have borrowed had an interest in concealing
the name of their tribal divinity; and therefore made it
ineffable.

[FN#174]  i.e. the grave, the fosse commune of slain men.

[FN#175]  A fancy name; "Zawash" in Pers. is =      the planet
Jupiter, either borrowed from Greece, or both descended from some
long forgotten ancestor.

[FN#176]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Bhazad (!) the
Impatient." The name is Persian, Bih (well, good) Zád (born). In
the adj. bih we recognize a positive lost in English and German
which retain the comparative (bih-tar = better) and superlative
(bih-tarin=best).

[FN#177]  i.e. the moiety kept by the bridegroom, a contingent
settlement paid at divorce or on the death of the husband.

[FN#178]  Arab. "Rumh"=the horseman's lance not the footman's
spear.

[FN#179]  i.e. became a highwayman (a time-honoured and
honourable career) in order to collect money for completing the
dowry.

[FN#180]  i.e. to the bride, the wedding-day; not to be
confounded with "going in unto" etc.

[FN#181]  Probably meaning that she saw the eyes espying through
the crevice without knowing whose they were.

[FN#182]  A fancy name intended to be Persian

[FN#183]  i.e. thy Harem, thy women.

[FN#184]  i.e. thy life hath been unduly prolonged.

[FN#185]  See Chavis and Cazotte, "Story of Ravia (Arwà!) the
Resigned." Dádbín (Persian)=one who looks to justice, a name
hardly deserved in this case.

[FN#186]  For this important province and city of Persia, see
Al-Mas'udí, ii. 2; iv. 86, etc. It gave one of the many names to
the Caspian Sea. The adjective is Tabari, whereas Tabaráni=native
of Tiberias (Tabariyah).

[FN#187]  Zor-khán=Lord Violence, and Kár-dán=Business-knower;
both Persian.

[FN#188]  "Arwà" written with a terminal of yá is a woman's P.N.
in Arabic.

[FN#189]  i.e. Not look down upon me with eyes of contempt. This
"marrying below one" is still an Eastern idea, very little known
to women in the West.

[FN#190]  Chavis and Cazotte call the Dabbús a "dabour" and
explain it as a "sort of scepter used by Eastern Princes, which
serves also as a weapon." For the Dabbús, or mace, see vol. vi.
249.

[FN#191]  i.e. Let thy purposes be righteous as thine outward
profession.

[FN#192]  See vol. vi. 130. This is another lieu commun amongst
Moslems; and its unfact requires only statement.

[FN#193]  Afterwards called his "chamberlain," i.e. guardian of
the Harem-door.

[FN#194]  i.e. Chosroës, whom Chavis and Cazotte make "Cyrus."

[FN#195]  Arab. "Tákiyah," used for the Persian Takhtrawán,
common in The Nights.

[FN#196]  Arab. "Kubbah," a dome-shaped tent, as elsewhere.

[FN#197]  This can refer only to Abu al-Khayr's having been put
to death on Kardan's charge, although the tale-teller, with
characteristic inconsequence, neglected to mention the event.

[FN#198]  Not referring to skull sutures, but to the forehead,
which is poetically compared with a page of paper upon which
Destiny writes her irrevocable decrees.

[FN#199]  Said in the grimmest earnest, not jestingly, as in vol.
iv. 264.

[FN#200]  i.e. the lex talionis, which is the essence of Moslem,
and indeed, of all criminal jurisprudence. We cannot wonder at
the judgment of Queen Arwa: even Confucius, the mildest and most
humane of lawgivers, would not pardon the man who allowed his
father's murderer to live. The Moslem lex talionis (Koran ii.
173) is identical with that of the Jews (Exod. xxi. 24), and the
latter probably derives from immemorial usage. But many modern
Rabbins explain away the Mosaical command as rather a demand for
a pecuniary mulct than literal retaliation. The well-known Isaac
Aburbanel cites many arguments in proof of this position: he
asks, for instance, supposing the accused have but one eye,
should he lose it for having struck out one of another man's two?
Moreover, he dwells upon the impossibility of inflicting a
punishment the exact equivalent of the injury; like Shylock's
pound of flesh without drawing blood. Moslems, however, know
nothing of these frivolities, and if retaliation be demanded the
judge must grant it. There is a legend in Marocco of an English
merchant who was compelled to forfeit tooth for tooth at the
instance of an old woman, but a profitable concession gilded the
pill.

[FN#201]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Bhazmant (!); or the
Confident Man." "Bakht (-i-) Zamán" in Pers. would=Luck of the
Time.

[FN#202]  Chavis and Cazotte change the name to "Abadid," which,
like "Khadídán," is nonsignificant.

[FN#203]  Arab. "Fáris," here a Reiter, or Dugald Dolgetti, as
mostly were the hordes led by the mediaeval Italian Condottiéri.

[FN#204]  So Napoleon the Great also believed that Providence is
mostly favorable to "gros bataillons."

[FN#205]  Pers. and Arab.="Good perfection."

[FN#206]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Baharkan." Bihkard (in
Shiraz pronounced "Kyard")="Well he did."

[FN#207]  See "Katrú" in the Introduction to the Bakhtiyár-námah.

[FN#208]  The text has "Jaukalán" for Saulaján, the Persian
"Chaugán"=the crooked bat used in Polo. See vol. 1. 46.

[FN#209]  Amongst Moslems, I have noted, circumstantial evidence
is not lawful: the witness must swear to what he has seen. A
curious consideration, how many innocent men have been hanged by
"circumstantial evidence." See vol. v. 97.

[FN#210]  In Chavis and Cazotte "Story of Abattamant (!), or the
Prudent Man;" also Aylán Shah becomes Olensa after Italian
fashion.

[FN#211]  In Arab. idiom a long hand or arm means power, a phrase
not wholly unused in European languages. Chavis and Cazotte
paraphrase "He who keeps his hands crossed upon his breast, shall
not see them cut off."

[FN#212]  Arab. "Jama'a atráfah," lit.=he drew in his
extremities, it being contrary to "etiquette" in the presence of
a superior not to cover hands and feet. In the wild Argentine
Republic the savage Gaucho removes his gigantic spurs when coming
into the presence of his master.

[FN#213]  About the equivalent to the Arab. or rather Egypto-
Syrian form "Jiddan," used in the modern slang sense.

[FN#214]  i.e. that he become my son-in-law.

[FN#215]  For the practice of shampooing often alluded to in The
Nights, see vol. iii. 17. The king "sleeping on the boys' knees"
means that he dropped off whilst his feet were on the laps of the
lads.

[FN#216]  Meaning the honour of his Harem.

[FN#217]  Pardon, lit.=security; the cry for quarter already
introduced into English

          "Or raise the craven cry Aman."

It was Mohammed's express command that this prayer for mercy
should be respected even in the fury of fight. See vol. i. 342.

[FN#218]  A saying found in every Eastern language beginning with
Hebrew; Proverbs xxvi. 27, "Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall
therein."

[FN#219]  i.e. a domed tomb where prayers and perlections of the
Koran could be made. "Kubbah" in Marocco is still the term for a
small square building with a low medianaranja cupola under which
a Santon lies interred. It is the "little Waly" of our "blind
travellers" in the unholy "Holy Land."

[FN#220]  i.e. to secure her assistance in arousing the king's
wrath.

[FN#221]  i.e. so slow to avenge itself.

[FN#222]  Story of Sultan Hebriam (!), and his Son" (Chavis and
Cazotte). Unless they greatly enlarged upon the text, they had a
much fuller copy than that found in the Bresl. Edit.

[FN#223]  A right kingly king, in the Eastern sense of the word,
would strike off their heads for daring to see omens threatening
his son and heir: this would be constructive treason of the
highest because it might be expected to cause its own fulfilment.

[FN#224]  Mohammed's Hadís "Kazzibú 'l-Munajjimúna bi Rabbi
'I-Ka'abah"=the Astrologers lied, by the Ka'abah's Lord!

[FN#225]  Arab. "Khawátín," plur. of Khátún, a matron, a lady,
vol. iv. 66.

[FN#226]  See Al-Mas'udi, chapt. xvii. (Fr. Transl. ii. 48-49) of
the circular cavity two miles deep and sixty in circuit inhabited
by men and animals on the Caucasus near Derbend.

[FN#227]  Arab. "Nafas" lit.=breath. Arabs living in a land of
caverns know by experience the danger of asphyxiation in such
places.

[FN#228]  This simple tale is told with much pathos not of words
but of sense.

[FN#229]  Arab. "Ajal"=the appointed day of death, also used for
sudden death. See vol. i. 74.

[FN#230]  i.e. the Autumnal Equinox, one of the two great
festival days (the other being the New Year) of the Persians, and
surviving in our Michaelmas. According to Al-Mas'udí (chap.
xxi.), it was established to commemorate the capture of Zahhák
(Azhi-Daháka), the biting snake (the Hindu Ahi) of night and
darkness, the Greek Astyages, by Furaydun or Feridun. Prof. Sayce
(Principles of Comparative Philology, p. 11) connects the latter
with the Vedic deity Trita, who harnessed the Sun-horse (Rig. v.
i. 163, 2, 3), the             of Homer, a title of Athene, the
Dawn-goddess, and Burnouf proved the same Trita to be Thraétaona,
son of Athwya, of the Avesta, who finally became Furaydún, the
Greek Kyrus. See vol. v. 1.

[FN#231]  In Chavis and Cazotte, "Story of Selimansha and his
Family."

[FN#232]  Arab. for Pers. Pahluwán (from Pahlau) a brave, a
warrior, an athlete, applied in India to a champion in any
gymnastic exercise, especially in wrestling. The Frenchman calls
him "Balavan"; and the Bresl. text in more than one place (p.
312) calls him "Bahwán."

[FN#233]  i.e. King (Arab.) King (Persian): we find also Sultan
Malik Shah=King King King.

[FN#234]  Arab. "Aulád-í," a vulgarism, plural for dual.

[FN#235]  Mr. Payne translates, "so he might take his father's
leavings" i.e. heritage, reading "Ásár" which I hold to be a
clerical error for Sár=Vendetta, blood revenge (Bresl. Edit. vi.
310).

[FN#236]  Arab. "Al-'Ásí" the pop. term for one who refuses to
obey a constituted authority and syn. with Pers. "Yághí." "Ant
'Ásí?" Wilt thou not yield thyself? says a policeman to a
refractory Fellah.

[FN#237]  i.e. of the Greeks: so in Kor. xxx. 1. "Alif Lam Mim,
the Greeks (Al-Roum) have been defeated." Mr. Rodwell curiously
remarks that "the vowel-points for defeated' not being
originally written, would make the prophecy true in either event,
according as the verb received an active or passive sense in
pronunciation." But in discovering this mare's nest, a rank piece
of humbug like Aio te Aeacida, etc., he forgets that all the
Prophet's "Companions," numbering some 5000, would pronounce it
only in one way and that no man could mistake "ghalabat" (active)
for "ghulibat" (passive).

[FN#238]  The text persistently uses "Járiyah"=damsel,
slave-girl, for the politer "Sabiyah"=young lady, being written
in a rude and uncourtly style.

[FN#239]  So our familiar phrase "Some one to back us."

[FN#240]  Arab. "'Akkada lahu ráy," plur. of ráyat, a banner. See
vol. iii. 307.

[FN#241]  i.e. "What concern hast thou with the king's health?"
The question is offensively put.

[FN#242]  Arab. "Masalah," a question; here an enigma.

[FN#243]  Arab. "Liallá" (i.e. li, an, lá) lest; but printed here
and elsewhere with the yá as if it were "laylan,"=for a single
night.

[FN#244]  i.e. if my death be fated to befal to-day, none may
postpone it to a later date.

[FN#245]  Arab. "Dustí": so the ceremony vulgarly called "Doseh"
and by the ItaloEgyptians "Dosso," the riding over disciples'
backs by the Shaykh of the Sa'diyah Darwayshes (Lane M.E. chapt.
xxv.) which took place for the last time at Cairo in 1881.

[FN#246]  In Chavis and Cazotte she conjures him "by the great
Maichonarblatha Sarsourat" (Míat wa arba'at ashar Súrat)=the 114
chapters of the Alcoran.

[FN#247]  I have noted that Moslem law is not fully satisfied
without such confession which, however, may be obtained by the
bastinado. It is curious to compare English procedure with what
Moslem would be in such a case as that of the famous Tichborne
Claimant. What we did need hardly be noticed. An Arab judge would
in a case so suspicious at once have applied the stick and in a
quarter of an hour would have settled the whole business; but
then what about the "Devil's own," the lawyers and lawyers' fees?
And he would have remarked that the truth is not less true
because obtained by such compulsory means.

[FN#248]  The Hudhud, so called from its cry "Hood! Hood!" It is
the Lat. upupa, Gr.      from its supposed note epip or upup; the
old Egyptian Kukufa; Heb. Dukiphath and Syriac Kikuphá (Bochart
Hierozoicon, part ii. 347). The Spaniards call it Gallo de Marzo
(March-Cock) from its returning in that month, and our old
writers "lapwing" (Deut. xiv. 18). This foul-feeding bird derives
her honours from chapt. xxvii. of the Koran (q.v.), the Hudhud
was sharp-sighted and sagacious enough to discover water
underground which the devils used to draw after she had marked
the place by her bill.

[FN#249]  Here the vocative Yá is designedly omitted in poetical
fashion (e.g., Khalíliyya--my friend!) to show the speaker's
emotion. See p. 113 of Captain A. Lockett's learned and curious
work the "Miet Amil" (=Hundred Regimens), Calcutta, 1814.

[FN#250]  The story-teller introduces this last instance with
considerable art as a preface to the dénoûement.

[FN#251]  See Chavis and Cazotte "Story of the King of Haram and
the slave."

[FN#252]  i.e. men caught red-handed.

[FN#253]  Arab. "Libwah," one of the multitudinous names for the
king of beasts, still used in Syria where the animal has been
killed out, soon to be followed by the bear (U. Syriacus). The
author know