nd Twenty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age,  that the Maghrabi, the Magician, fell to teaching Alaeddin
how he should descend into the Hoard and continued, "On reaching
the saloon thou shalt there find a Lamp hanging from its ceiling;
so mount the ladder and take that Lamp and place it in thy
breast-pocket after pouring out its contents; nor fear evil from
it for thy clothes because its contents are not common
oil.[FN#91] And on return thou art allowed to pluck from the
trees whatso thou pleasest, for all is thine so long as the Lamp
is in thy hand." Now when the Moorman ended his charge to
Alaeddin, he drew off a seal-ring[FN#92] and put it upon the
lad's forefinger saying, "O my son, verily this signet shall free
thee from all hurt and fear which may threaten thee, but only on
condition that thou bear in mind all I have told thee.[FN#93] So
arise straightway and go down the stairs, strengthening thy
purpose and girding the loins of resolution: moreover fear not
for thou art now a man and no longer a child. And in shortest
time, O my son, thou shalt win thee immense riches and thou shalt
become the wealthiest of the world." Accordingly, Alaeddin arose
and descended into the souterrain, where he found the four halls,
each containing four jars of gold and these he passed by, as the
Maroccan had bidden him, with the utmost care and caution. Thence
he fared into the garden and walked along its length until he
entered the saloon, where he mounted the ladder and took the Lamp
which he extinguished, pouring out the oil which was therein, and
placed it in his breast-pocket. Presently, descending the ladder
he returned to the garden where he fell to gazing at the trees
whereupon sat birds glorifying with loud voices their great
Creator. Now he had not observed them as he went in, but all
these trees bare for fruitage costly gems; moreover each had its
own kind of growth and jewels of its peculiar sort; and these
were of every colour, green and white; yellow, red and other such
brilliant hues and the radiance flashing from these gems paled
the rays of the sun in forenoon sheen. Furthermore the size of
each stone so far surpassed description that no King of the Kings
of the world owned a single gem equal to the larger sort nor
could boast of even one half the size of the smaller kind of
them.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin walked amongst the trees and gazed upon them
and other things which surprised the sight and bewildered the
wits; and, as he considered them, he saw that in lieu of common
fruits the produce was of mighty fine jewels and precious
stones,[FN#94]  such as emeralds and diamonds; rubies, spinels
and balasses, pearls and similar gems astounding the mental
vision of man. And forasmuch as the lad had never beheld things
like these during his born days nor had reached those years of
discretion which would teach him the worth of such valuables (he
being still but a little lad), he fancied that all these jewels
were of glass or crystal. So he collected them until he had
filled his breast-pockets and began to certify himself if they
were or were not common fruits, such as grapes, figs and such
like edibles. But seeing them of glassy substance, he, in his
ignorance of precious stones and their prices, gathered into his
breast-pockets every kind of growth the trees afforded; and,
having failed of his purpose in finding them food, he said in his
mind, "I will collect a portion of these glass fruits for
playthings at home." So he fell to plucking them in quantities
and cramming them in his pokes and breast-pockets till these were
stuffed full; after which he picked others which he placed in his
waist-shawl and then, girding himself therewith, carried off all
he availed to, purposing to place them in the house by way of
ornaments and, as hath been mentioned, never imagining that they
were other than glass. Then he hurried his pace in fear of his
uncle, the Maghrabi, until he had passed through the four halls
and lastly on his return reached the souterrain where he cast not
a look at the jars of gold, albeit he was able and allowed to
take of the contents on his way back. But when he came to the
souterrain-stairs[FN#95] and clomb the steps till naught remained
but the last; and, finding this higher than all the others, he
was unable alone and unassisted, burthened moreover as he was, to
mount it. So he said to the Maghrabi, "O my uncle, lend me thy
hand and aid me to climb;" but the Moorman answered, "O my son,
give me the Lamp and lighten thy load; belike 'tis that weigheth
thee down." The lad rejoined, "O my uncle, 'tis not the Lamp
downweigheth me at all; but do thou lend me a hand and as soon as
I reach ground I will give it to thee." Hereat the Maroccan, the
Magician, whose only object was the Lamp and none other, began to
insist upon Alaeddin giving it to him at once; but the lad
(forasmuch as he had placed it at the bottom of his breast-pocket
and his other pouches being full of gems bulged outwards)[FN#96]
could not reach it with his fingers to hand it over, so the
wizard after much vain persistency in requiring what his nephew
was unable to give, fell to raging with furious rage and to
demanding the Lamp whilst Alaeddin could not get at it.--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin could not get at the Lamp so as to hand it to
his uncle the Maghrabi, that false felon, so the Magician waxed
foolish with fury for that he could not win to his wish. Yet had
the lad promised truthfully that he would give it up as soon as
he might reach ground, without lying thought or ill-intent. But
when the Moorman saw that he would not hand it over, he waxed
wroth with wrath exceeding and cut off all his hopes of winning
it; so he conjured and adjured and cast incense amiddlemost the
fire, when forthright the slab made a cover of itself, and by the
might of magic ridded the entrance; the earth buried the stone as
it was aforetime and Alaeddin, unable to issue forth, remained
underground. Now the Sorcerer was a stranger, and, as we have
mentioned, no uncle of Alaeddin's, and he had misrepresented
himself and preferred a lying claim, to the end that he might
obtain the Lamp by means of the lad for whom his Hoard had been
upstored. So the Accursed heaped the earth over him and left him
to die of hunger. For this Maghrabi was an African of Afrik›yah
proper, born in the Inner Sunset-land, and from his earliest age
upwards he had been addicted to witchcraft and had studied and
practiced every manner of occult science, for which unholy lore
the city of Africa[FN#97] is notorious. And he ceased not to read
and hear lectures until he had become a past-master in all such
knowledge. And of the abounding skill in spells and conjurations
which he had acquired by the perusing and the lessoning of forty
years, one day of the days he discovered by devilish inspiration
that there lay in an extreme city of the cities of China, named
Al-Kal'ﬂs,[FN#98] an immense Hoard, the like whereof none of the
Kings in this world had ever accumulated: moreover, that the most
marvellous article in this Enchanted Treasure was a wonderful
Lamp which, whoso possessed, could not possibly be surpassed by
any man upon earth, either in high degree or in wealth and
opulence; nor could the mightiest monarch of the universe attain
to the all-sufficiency of this Lamp with its might of magical
means.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales." whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Maghrabi assured himself by his science and
saw that this Hoard could be opened only by the presence of a lad
named Alaeddin, of pauper family and abiding in that very city,
and learnt how taking it would be easy and without hardships, he
straightway and without stay or delay equipped himself for a
voyage to China (as we have already told) and he did what he did
with Alaeddin fancying that he would become Lord of the Lamp. But
his attempt and his hopes were baffled and his work was clean
wasted; whereupon, determining to do the lad die, he heaped up
the earth over him by gramarye to the end that the unfortunate
might perish, reflecting that "The live man hath no
murtherer."[FN#99] Secondly, he did so with the design that, as
Alaeddin could not come forth from underground, he would also be
impotent to bring out the Lamp from the souterrain. So presently
he wended his ways and retired to his own land, Africa, a sadder
man and disappointed of all his expectations. Such was the case
with the Wizard; but as regards Alaeddin when the earth was
heaped over him, he began shouting to the Moorman whom he
believed to be his uncle, and praying him to lend a hand that he
might issue from the souterrain and return to earth's surface;
but, however loudly he cried, none was found to reply. At that
moment he comprehended the sleight which the Maroccan had played
upon him, and that the man was no uncle but a liar and a wizard.
Then the unhappy despaired of life, and learned to his sorrow
that there was no escape for him; so he fell to beweeping with
sore weeping the calamity had befallen him; and after a little
while he stood up and descended the stairs to see if Allah
Almighty had lightened his grief-load by leaving a door of issue.
So he turned him to the right and to the left but he saw naught
save darkness and four walls closed upon him, for that the
Magician had by his magic locked all the doors and had shut up
even the garden, wherethrough the lad erst had passed, lest it
offer him the means of issuing out upon earth's surface, and that
he might surely die. Then Alaeddin's weeping waxed sorer, and his
wailing louder whenas he found all the doors fast shut, for he
had thought to solace himself awhile in the garden. But when he
felt that all were locked, he fell to shedding tears and
lamenting like unto one who hath lost his every hope, and he
returned to sit upon the stairs of the flight whereby he had
entered the souterrain.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.
 
       When it was the Five Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin sat down upon the stair of the vault weeping
and wailing and wanting all hopes. But it is a light matter for
Allah (be He exalted and extolled !) whenas He designeth aught to
say, "Be" and it becometh; for that He createth joy in the midst
of annoy; and on this wise it was with Alaeddin. Whilst the
Maghrabi, the Magician, was sending him down into the souterrain
he set upon his finger by way of gift, a seal ring and said,
"Verily, this signet shall save thee from every strait an thou
fall into calamity and ill shifts of time; and it shall remove
from thee all hurt and harm, and aid thee with a strong arm
whereso thou mayest be set."[FN#100] Now this was by destiny of
God the Great, that it might be the means of Alaeddin's escape;
for whilst he sat wailing and weeping over his case and cast away
all hope of life, and utter misery overwhelmed him, he rubbed his
hands together for excess of sorrow, as is the wont of the
woeful; then, raising them in supplication to Allah, he cried, "I
testify that there is no God save Thou alone, The Most Great, the
Omnipotent, the All-Conquering, Quickener of the dead, Creator of
man's need and Granter thereof, Resolver of his difficulties and
duresse and Bringer of joy not of annoy. Thou art my sufficiency
and Thou art the Truest of Trustees. And I bear witness that
Mohammed is Thy servant and Thine Apostle and I supplicate Thee,
O my God, by his favour with Thee to free me from this my foul
plight." And whilst he implored the Lord and was chafing his
hands in the soreness of his sorrow for that had befallen him of
calamity, his fingers chanced to rub the Ring when, lo and
behold! forthright its Familiar rose upright before him and
cried, "Adsum; thy slave between thy hands is come! Ask whatso
thou wantest, for that I am the thrall of him on whose hand is
the Ring, the Signet of my lord and master." Hereat the lad
looked at him and saw standing before him a Mﬂrid like unto an
Ifr›t[FN#101] of our lord Solomon's Jinns. He trembled at the
terrible sight; but, hearing the Slave of the Ring say, "Ask
whatso thou wantest, verily, I am thy thrall, seeing that the
signet of my lord be upon thy finger," he recovered his spirits
and remembered the Moorman's saying when giving him the Ring So
he rejoiced exceedingly and became brave and cried, "Ho thou;
Slave of the Lord of the Ring, I desire thee to set me upon the
face of earth." And hardly had he spoken this speech when
suddenly the ground clave asunder and he found himself at the
door of the Hoard and outside it in full view of the world. Now
for three whole days he had been sitting in the darkness of the
Treasury underground and when the sheen of day and the thine of
sun smote his face he found himself unable to keep his eyes open;
so he began to unclose the lids a little and to close them a
little until his eyeballs regained force and got used to the
light and were purged of the noisome murk.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell me some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin, issuing from the Treasury, opened his eyes
after a short space of time and saw himself upon earth's surface,
the which rejoiced him exceedingly, and withal he was astounded
at finding himself without the Hoard-door whereby he had passed
in when it was opened by the Maghrabi, the Magician; especially
as the adit had been lidded and the ground had been smoothed,
showing no sign whatever of entrance. Thereat his surprise
increased until he fancied himself in another place, nor was his
mind convinced that the stead was the same until he saw the spot
whereupon they had kindled the fire of wood-chips and dried
sticks, and where the African Wizard had conjured over the
incense. Then he turned him rightwards and leftwards and sighted
the gardens from afar and his eyes recognized the road whereby he
had come. So he returned thanks to Allah Almighty who had
restored him to the face of earth and had freed him from death
after he had cut off all hopes of life. Presently he arose and
walked along the way to the town, which now he well knew, until
he entered the streets and passed on to his own home. Then he
went in to his mother and on seeing her, of the overwhelming
stress of joy at his escape and the memory of past affright and
the hardships he had borne and the pangs of hunger, he fell to
the ground before his parent in a fainting-fit. Now his mother
had been passing sad since the time of his leaving her and he
found her moaning and crying about him; however on sighting him
enter the house she joyed with exceeding joy, but soon was
overwhelmed with woe when he sank upon the ground swooning before
her eyes. Still,[FN#102] she did not neglect the matter or treat
it lightly, but at once hastened to sprinkle water upon his face
and after she asked of the neighbours some scents which she made
him snuff up. And when he came round a little, he prayed her to
bring him somewhat of food saying, "O my mother 'tis now three
days since I ate anything at all." Thereupon she arose and
brought him what she had by her; then, setting it before him,
said, "Come forward, O my son; eat and be cheered[FN#103] and,
when thou shalt have rested, tell me what hath betided and
affected thee, O my child; at this present I will not question
thee for thou art aweary in very deed."--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell me some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin ate and drank and was cheered and after he had
rested and had recovered spirits he cried, "Ah, O my mother, I
have a sore grievance against thee for leaving me to that
accursed wight who strave to compass my destruction and designed
to take my life.[FN#104] Know that I beheld Death with mine own
eyes at the hand of this damned wretch, whom thou didst certify
to be my uncle; and, had not Almighty Allah rescued me from him,
I and thou, O my mother, had been cozened by the excess of this
Accursed's promises to work my welfare, and by the great show of
affection which he manifested to us. Learn, O my mother, that
this fellow is a sorcerer, a Moorman, an accursed, a liar, a
traitor, a hypocrite;[FN#105]  nor deem I that the devils under
the earth are damnable as he. Allah abase him in his every book!
Hear then, O my mother, what this abominable one did, and all I
shall tell thee will be soothfast and certain. See how the damned
villain brake every promise he made, certifying that he would
soon work all good with me; and do thou consider the fondness
which he displayed to me and the deeds which he did by me; and
all this only to win his wish, for his design was to destroy me;
and Alhamdolillah--laud to the Lord--for my deliverance. Listen
and learn, O my mother, how this Accursed entreated me." Then
Alaeddin informed his mother of all that had befallen him
(weeping the while for stress of gladness); how the Maghrabi had
led him to a hill wherein was hidden the Hoard and how he had
conjured and fumigated, adding,[FN#106] "After which, O my
mother, mighty fear get hold of me when the hill split and the
earth gaped before me by his wizardry; and I trembled with terror
at the rolling of thunder in mine ears and the murk which fell
upon us when he fumigated and muttered spells. Seeing these
horrors I in mine affright designed to fly; but, when he
understood mine intent he reviled me and smote me a buffet so
sore that it caused me to swoon. However, inasmuch as the
Treasury was to be opened only by means of me, O my mother, he
could not descend therein himself, it being in my name and not in
his; and, for that he is an ill-omened magician, he understood
that I was necessary to him and this was his need of me."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. 
 
      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell me some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin acquainted his mother with all that had
befallen him from the Maghrabi, the Magician, and said, "After he
had buffetted me, he judged it advisable to soothe me in order
that he might send me down into the Enchanted Treasury; and first
he drew from his finger a Ring which he placed upon mine. So I
descended and found four halls all full of gold and silver which
counted as naught, and the Accursed had charged me not to touch
aught thereof. Then I entered a mighty fine flower-garden
everywhere bedecked with tall trees whose foliage and fruitage
bewildered the wits, for all, O my mother, were of vari-coloured
glass, and lastly I reached the Hall wherein hung this Lamp. So I
took it straightway and put it out[FN#107] and poured forth its
contents." And so saying Alaeddin drew the Lamp from his breast-
pocket and showed it to his mother, together with the gems and
jewels which he had brought from the garden; and there were two
large bag-pockets full of precious stones, whereof not one was to
be found amongst the kings of the world. But the lad knew naught
anent their worth deeming them glass or crystal; and presently he
resumed, "After this, O mother mine, I reached the Hoard-door
carrying the Lamp and shouted to the accursed Sorcerer, which
called himself my uncle, to lend me a hand and hale me up, I
being unable to mount of myself the last step for the over weight
of my burthen. But he would not and said only, ÊFirst hand me the
Lamp!' As, however, I had placed it at the bottom of my breast-
pocket and the other pouches bulged out beyond it, I was unable
to get at it and said, ÊO my uncle, I cannot reach thee the Lamp,
but I will give it to thee when outside the Treasury.' His only
need was the Lamp and he designed, O my mother, to snatch it from
me and after that slay me, as indeed he did his best to do by
heaping the earth over my head. Such then is what befel me from
this foul Sorcerer." Hereupon Alaeddin fell to abusing the
Magician in hot wrath and with a burning heart and crying, "Well-
away! I take refuge from this damned wight, the ill-omened, the
wrongdoer, the for-swearer, the lost to all humanity, the arch-
traitor, the hypocrite, the annihilator of ruth and mercy."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when Alaeddin's mother heard his words and what had
befallen him from the Maghrabi, the Magician, she said, "Yea,
verily, O my son, he is a miscreant, a hypocrite who murthereth
the folk by his magic; but 'twas the grace of Allah Almighty, O
my child, that saved thee from the tricks and the treachery of
this accursed Sorcerer whom I deemed to be truly thine
uncle."[FN#108] Then, as the lad had not slept a wink for three
days and found himself nodding, he sought his natural rest, his
mother doing on like wise; nor did he awake till about noon on
the second day. As soon as he shook off slumber he called for
somewhat of food being sore anhungered, but said his mother, "O
my son, I have no victual for thee inasmuch as yesterday thou
atest all that was in the house. But wait patiently a while: I
have spun a trifle of yarn which I will carry to the market-
street and sell it and buy with what it may be worth some victual
for thee." "O my mother," said he, "keep your yarn and sell it
not; but fetch me the Lamp I brought hither that I may go vend it
and with its price purchase provaunt, for that I deem 'twill
bring more money than the spinnings." So Alaeddin's mother arose
and fetched the Lamp for her son; but, while so doing, she saw
that it was dirty exceedingly; so she said, "O my son, here is
the Lamp, but 'tis very foul: after we shall have washed it and
polished it 'twill sell better." Then, taking a handful of sand
she began to rub therewith, but she had only begun when appeared
to her one of the Jﬂnn whose favour was frightful and whose bulk
was horrible big, and he was gigantic as one of the
Jabﬂbirah.[FN#109]  And forthright he cried to her, "Say whatso
thou wantest of me? Here am I, thy Slave and Slave to whoso
holdeth the Lamp; and not I alone, but all the Slaves of the
Wonderful Lamp which thou hendest in hand." She quaked and terror
was sore upon her when she looked at that frightful form and her
tongue being tied she could not return aught reply, never having
been accustomed to espy similar semblances.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin's mother could not of her terror return a
reply to the Mﬂrid; nay she fell to the ground oppressed by her
affright.[FN#110] Now her son was standing afar off and he had
already seen the Jinn› of the Ring which he had rubbed within the
Treasury; so when he heard the Slave speaking to his parent, he
hastened forwards and snatching the Lamp from her hand, said, "O
Slave of the Lamp, I am unhungered and 'tis my desire that thou
fetch me somewhat to eat and let it be something toothsome beyond
our means." The Jinni disappeared for an eye-twinkle and returned
with a mighty fine tray and precious of price, for that 'twas all
in virginal silver and upon it stood twelve golden platters of
meats manifold and dainties delicate, with bread snowier than
snow; also two silvern cups and as many black jacks[FN#111] full
of wine clear-strained and long-stored. And after setting all
these before Alaeddin, he evanished from vision. Thereupon the
lad went and sprinkled rose water upon his mother's face and
caused her snuff up perfumes pure and pungent and said to her
when she revived, "Rise, O mother mine, and let us eat of these
meats wherewith Almighty Allah hath eased our poverty." But when
she saw that mighty fine silvern tray she fell to marvelling at
the matter and Quoth she, "O my son, who be this generous, this
beneficent one who hath abated our hunger-pains and our penury?
We are indeed under obligation to him and, meseemeth, 'tis the
Sultan who, hearing of our mean condition and our misery, hath
sent us this food tray." Quoth he, "O my mother, this be no time
for questioning: arouse thee and let us eat for we are both a-
famished." Accordingly, they sat down to the tray and fell to
feeding when Alaeddin's mother tasted meats whose like in all her
time she had never touched; so they devoured them with sharpened
appetites and all the capacity engendered by stress of hunger;
and, secondly, the food was such that marked the tables of the
Kings. But neither of them knew whether the tray was or was not
valuable, for never in their born days had they looked upon aught
like it. As soon as they had finished the meal (withal leaving
victual enough for supper and eke for the next day), they arose
and washed their hands and sat at chat, when the mother turned to
her son and said, "Tell me, O my child, what befel thee from the
Slave, the Jinn›, now that Alhamdolillah--laud to the Lord!--we
have eaten our full of the good things wherewith He hath favoured
us and thou hast no pretext for saying to me, ÊI am anhungered.'
" So Alaeddin related to her all that took place between him and
the Slave what while she had sunk upon the ground aswoon for sore
terror; and at this she, being seized with mighty great surprise,
said, " 'tis true; for the Jinns do present themselves before the
Sons of Adam[FN#112] but I, O my son, never saw them in all my
life and meseemeth that this be the same who saved thee when thou
west within the Enchanted Hoard." "This is not he, O my mother:
this who appeared before thee is the Slave of the Lamp!" "Who may
this be, O my son?" "This be a Slave of sort and shape other than
he; that was the Familiar of the Ring and this his fellow thou
sawest was the Slave of the Lamp thou hentest in hand."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin said, "Verily, O my mother, the Jinni who
appeared to thee was the Slave of the Lamp." And when his parent
heard these words she cried, "There! there![FN#113] so this
Accursed, who showed himself to me and went nigh unto killing me
with affright, is attached to the Lamp." "Yes," he replied, and
she rejoined, "Now I conjure thee, O my son, by the milk
wherewith I suckled thee, to throw away from thee this Lamp and
this Ring; because they can cause us only extreme terror and I
especially can never abear a second glance at them. Moreover all
intercourse with them is unlawful, for that the Prophet (whom
Allah save and assain!) warned us against them with threats." He
replied, "Thy commands, O my mother, be upon my head[FN#114] and
mine eyes; but, as regards this saying thou saidest, 'tis
impossible that I part or with Lamp or with Ring. Thou thyself
hast seen what good the Slave wrought us whenas we were
famishing; and know, O my mother, that the Maghrabi, the liar,
the Magician, when sending me down into the Hoard, sought nor the
silver nor the gold wherewith the four halls were fulfilled, but
charged me to bring him only the Lamp (naught else), because in
very deed he had learned its priceless value; and, had he not
been certified of it, he had never endured such toil and trouble
nor had he travelled from his own land to our land in search
thereof; neither had he shut me up in the Treasury when he
despaired of the Lamp which I would not hand to him. Therefore it
besitteth us, O my mother, to keep this Lamp and take all care
thereof nor disclose its mysteries to any; for this is now our
means of livelihood and this it is shall enrich us. And likewise
as regards the Ring, I will never withdraw it from my finger
inasmuch as but for this thou hadst nevermore seen me on life nay
I should have died within the Hoard underground. How then can I
possibly remove it from my finger? And who wotteth that which may
betide me by the lapse of Time, what trippings or calamities or
injurious mishaps wherefrom this Ring may deliver me? However,
for regard to thy feelings I will stow away the Lamp nor ever
suffer it to be seen of thee hereafter." Now when his mother
heard his words and pondered them she knew they were true and
said to him, "Do, O my son, whatso thou wiliest for my part I
wish never to see them nor ever sight that frightful spectacle I
erst saw."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be not sleepy, do tell us
some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied, With
love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the Age, that
Alaeddin and his mother continued eating of the meats brought
them by the Jinni for two full told days till they were finished;
but when he learned that nothing of food remained for them, he
arose and took a platter of the platters which the Slave had
brought upon the tray. Now they were all of the finest gold but
the lad knew naught thereof; so he bore it to the Bazar and
there, seeing a man which was a Jew, a viler than the
Satans,[FN#115] offered it to him for sale. When the Jew espied
it he took the lad aside that none might see him, and he looked
at the platter and considered it till he was certified that it
was of gold refined. But he knew not whether Alaeddin was
acquainted with its value or he was in such matters a raw
laddie,[FN#116]  so he asked him, "For how much, O my lord, this
platter?" and the other answered, "Thou wottest what be its
worth." The Jew debated with himself as to how much he should
offer, because Alaeddin had returned him a craftsman-like reply;
and he thought of the smallest valuation; at the same time he
feared lest the lad, haply knowing its worth, should expect a
considerable sum. So he said in his mind, "Belike the fellow is
an ignoramous in such matters nor is ware of the price of the
platter." Whereupon he pulled out of his pocket a diner, and
Alaeddin eyed the gold piece lying in his palm and hastily taking
it went his way; whereby the Jew was certified of his customer's
innocence of all such knowledge, and repented with entire
repentance that he had given him a golden diner in lieu of a
copper carat,[FN#117] a bright-polished groat. However, Alaeddin
made no delay but went at once to the baker's where he bought him
bread and changed the ducat; then, going to his mother, he gave
her the scones and the remaining small coin and said, "O my
mother, hie thee and buy thee all we require." So she arose and
walked to the Bazar and laid in the necessary stock; after which
they ate and were cheered. And whenever the price of the platter
was expended, Alaeddin would take another and carry it to the
accursed Jew who bought each and every at a pitiful price; and
even this he would have minished but, seeing how he had paid a
diner for the first, he feared to offer a lesser sum, lest the
lad go and sell to some rival in trade and thus lose his usurious
gains. Now when all the golden platters were sold, there remained
only the silver tray whereupon they stood; and, for that it was
large and weighty, Alaeddin brought the Jew to his house and
produced the article, when the buyer, seeing its size gave him
ten dinars and these being accepted went his ways. Alaeddin and
his mother lived upon the sequins until they were spent; then he
brought out the Lamp and rubbed it and straightway appeared the
Slave who had shown himself aforetime.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Jinni, the Slave of the Lamp, on appearing to
Alaeddin said, "Ask, O my lord, whatso thou wantest for I am thy
Slave and the thrall of whoso hath the Lamp;" and said the lad,
"I desire that thou bring me a tray of food like unto that thou
broughtest me erewhiles, for indeed I am famisht." Accordingly,
in the glance of an eye the Slave produced a similar tray
supporting twelve platters of the most sumptuous, furnished with
requisite cates; and thereon stood clean bread and sundry glass
bottles[FN#118] of strained wine. Now Alaeddin's mother had gone
out when she knew he was about to rub the Lamp that she might not
again look upon the Jinni; but after a while she returned and,
when she sighted the tray covered with silvern[FN#119] platters
and smelt the savour of the rich meats diffused over the house,
she marvelled and rejoiced. Thereupon Quoth he, "Look, O my
mother! Thou badest me throw away the Lamp, see now its virtues;"
and Quoth she, "O my son, Allah increase his[FN#120] weal, but I
would not look upon him." Then the lad sat down with his parent
to the tray and they ate and drank until they were satisfied;
after which they removed what remained for use on the morrow. As
soon as the meats had been consumed, Alaeddin arose and stowed
away under his clothes a platter of the platters and went forth
to find the Jew, purposing to sell it to him; but by fiat of Fate
he passed by the shop of an ancient jeweller, an honest man and a
pious who feared Allah. When the Shaykh saw the lad, he asked him
saying, "O my son, what dost thou want? for that times manifold
have I seen thee passing hereby and having dealings with a Jewish
man; and I have espied thee handing over to him sundry articles;
now also I fancy thou hast somewhat for sale and thou seekest him
as a buyer thereof. But thou wottest not, O my child, that the
Jews ever hold lawful to them the good of Moslems,[FN#121] the
Confessors of Allah Almighty's unity, and, always defraud them;
especially this accursed Jew with whom thou hast relations and
into whose hands thou hast fallen. If then, O my son, thou have
aught thou wouldest sell show the same to me and never fear, for
I will give thee its full price by the truth of Almighty Allah."
Thereupon Alaeddin brought out the platter which when the ancient
goldsmith saw, he took and weighed it in his scales and asked the
lad saying, "Was it the fellow of this thou soldest to the Jew?"
"Yes, its fellow and its brother," he answered, and Quoth the old
man, "What price did he pay thee?" Quoth the lad, "One diner."--
And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the ancient goldsmith, hearing from Alaeddin how the
Jew used to give only one diner as the price of the platter,
cried, "Ah! I take refuge from this Accursed who cozeneth the
servants of Allah Almighty!" Then, looking at the lad, he
exclaimed, "O my son, verily yon tricksy Jew hath cheated thee
and laughed at thee, this platter being pure silver and virginal.
I have weighed it and found it worth seventy diners; and, if thou
please to take its value, take it." Thereupon the Shaykh counted
out to him seventy gold pieces, which he accepted and presently
thanked him for his kindness in exposing the Jew's rascality. And
after this, whenever the price of a platter was expended, he
would bring another, and on such wise he and his mother were soon
in better circumstances; yet they ceased not to live after their
olden fashion as middle class folk[FN#122] without spending on
diet overmuch or squandering money. But Alaeddin had now thrown
off the ungraciousness of his boyhood; he shunned the society of
scapegraces and he began to frequent good men and true, repairing
daily to the market-street of the merchants and there companying
with the great and the small of them, asking about matters of
merchandise and learning the price of investments and so forth;
he likewise frequented the Bazars of the Goldsmiths and the
Jewellers[FN#123] where he would sit and divert himself by
inspecting their precious stones and by noting how jewels were
sold and bought therein. Accordingly, he presently became ware
that the tree-fruits, wherewith he had filled his pockets what
time he entered the Enchanted Treasury, were neither glass nor
crystal but gems rich and rare; and he understood that he had
acquired immense wealth such as the Kings never can possess. He
then considered all the precious stones which were in the
Jewellers' Quarter, but found that their biggest was not worth
his smallest. On this wise he ceased not every day repairing to
the Bazar and making himself familiar with the folk and winning
their loving will;[FN#124] and enquiring anent selling and
buying, giving and taking, the dear and the cheap, until one day
of the days when, after rising at dawn and donning his dress he
went forth, as was his wont, to the Jewellers' Bazar; and, as he
passed along it he heard the crier crying as follows: "By command
of our magnificent master, the King of the Time and the Lord of
the Age and the Tide, let all the folk lock up their shops and
stores and retire within their houses, for that the Lady Badr al-
Budur,[FN#125] daughter of the Sultan, designeth to visit the
Hammﬂm; and whoso gainsayeth the order shall be punished with
death-penalty and be his blood upon his own neck!" But when
Alaeddin heard the proclamation, he longed to look upon the
King's daughter and said in his mind, "Indeed all the lieges talk
of her beauty and loveliness and the end of my desires is to see
her."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Fortieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin fell to contriving some means whereby he might
look upon the Princess Badr al-Budur and at last judged best to
take his station behind the Hammam door whence he might see her
face as she entered.[FN#126] Accordingly, without stay or delay
he repaired to the Baths before she was expected and stood a-rear
of the entrance, a place whereat none of the folk happened to be
looking. Now when the Sultan's daughter had gone the rounds of
the city and its main streets and had solaced herself by sight-
seeing, she finally reached the Hammam and whilst entering she
raised her veil, when her face rose before sight as it were a
pearl of price or a sheeny sun, and she was as one of whom the
describer sang,

"Magic Kohl enchanteth the glances so bright of her: * We pluck
     roses in posies from cheeks rosy bright of her: 
Of night's gloomiest hue is the gloom of the hair of her * And
     her bright brow uplighteth the murks of the night of
     her."[FN#127]

(Quoth the reciter) when the Princess raised from her face the
veil and Alaeddin saw her favour he said, "In very truth her
fashion magnifieth her Almighty Fashioner and glory be to Him who
created her and adorned her with this beauty and loveliness." His
strength was struck down from the moment he saw her and his
thoughts were distraught; his gaze was dazed, the love of her get
hold of the whole of his heart; and, when he returned home to his
mother, he was as one in ecstasy. His parent addressed him, but
he neither replied nor denied; and, when she set before him the
morning meal he continued in like case; so Quoth she, "O my son,
what is't may have befallen thee? Say me, doth aught ail thee?
Let me know what ill hath betided thee for, unlike thy custom,
thou speakest not when I bespeak thee." Thereupon Alaeddin (who
used to think that all women resembled his mother[FN#128] and
who, albeit he had heard of the charms of Badr al-Budur, daughter
of the Sultan, yet knew not what "beauty" and "loveliness" might
signify) turned to his parent and exclaimed, "Let me be!"
However, she persisted in praying him to come forwards and eat,
so he did her bidding but hardly touched food; after which he lay
at full length on his bed all the night through in cogitation
deep until morning morrowed. The same was his condition during
the next day, when his mother was perplexed for the case of her
son and unable to learn what had happened to him. So, thinking
that belike he might be ailing she drew near him and asked him
saying, "O my son, an thou sense aught of pain or such like, let
me know that I may fare forth and fetch thee the physician; and
to-day there be in this our city a leech from the Land of the
Arabs whom the Sultan hath sent to summon and the bruit abroad
reporteth him to be skillful exceedingly. So, an be thou ill let
me go and bring him to thee."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the Age,
that Alaeddin, hearing his parent's offer to summon the
mediciner, said, "O my mother, I am well in body and on no wise
ill. But I ever thought that all women resembled thee until
yesterday, when I beheld the Lady Badr al-Budur daughter of the
Sultan, as she was faring for the Baths." Then he related to her
all and everything that had happened to him adding, "Haply thou
also hast heard the crier a-crying, ÊLet no man open shop or
stand in street that the Lady Badr al-Budur may repair to the
Hammam without eye seeing her.' But I have looked upon her even
as she is, for she raised her veil at the door and, when I viewed
her favour and beheld that noble work of the Creator, a sore fit
of ecstasy, O my mother, fell upon me for love of her and firm
resolve to win her hath opened its way into every limb of me, nor
is repose possible for me except I win her. Wherefor I purpose
asking her to wife from the Sultan her sire in lawful wedlock."
When Alaeddin's mother heard her son's words, she belittled his
wits and cried, "O my child, the name of Allah upon thee!
meseemeth thou hast lost thy senses. But be thou rightly guided,
O my son, nor be thou as the men Jinn-maddened!" He replied,
"Nay, O mother mine, I am not out of my mind nor am I of the
maniacs; nor shall this thy saying alter one jot of what is in my
thoughts, for rest is impossible to me until I shall have won the
dearling of my heart's core, the beautiful Lady Badr al-Budur.
And now I am resolved to ask her of her sire the Sultan." She
rejoined, "O my son, by my life upon thee speak not such speech,
lest any overhear thee and say thou be insane: so cast away from
thee such nonsense! Who shall undertake a matter like this or
make such request to the King? Indeed, I know not how, supposing
this thy speech to be soothfast, thou shalt manage to crave such
grace of the Sultan or through whom thou desirest to propose it."
He retorted, "Through whom shall I ask it, O my mother, when thou
art present? And who is there fonder and more faithful to me than
thyself? So my design is that thou thy self shalt proffer this my
petition." Quoth she, "O my son, Allah remove me far therefrom!
What! have I lost my wits like thyself? Cast the thought away and
a long way from thy heart. Remember whose son thou art, O my
child, the orphan boy of a tailor, the poorest and meanest of the
tailors toiling in this city; and I, thy mother, am also come of
pauper folk and indigent. How then durst thou ask to wife the
daughter of the Sultan, whose sire would not deign marry her with
the sons of the Kings and the Sovrans, except they were his peers
in honour and grandeur and majesty; and, were they but one degree
lower, he would refuse his daughter to them."--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin took patience until his parent had said her
say, when Quoth he, "O my mother, everything thou hast called to
mind is known to me; moreover 'tis thoroughly well known to me
that I am the child of pauper parents; withal do not these words
of thee divert me from my design at all, at all Nor the less do I
hope of thee, an I be thy son and thou truly love me, that thou
grant me this favour, otherwise thou wilt destroy me; and present
Death hovereth over my head except I win my will of my heart's
dearling; and I, O my mother, am in every case thy child."
Hearing these words, his parent wept of her sorrow for him and
said, "O my child! Yes, in very deed I am thy mother, nor have I
any son or life's blood of my liver except thyself, and the end
of my wishes is to give thee a wife and rejoice in thee. But
suppose that I would seek a bride of our likes and equals, her
people will at once ask an thou have any land or garden,
merchandise or handicraft, wherewith thou canst support her; and
what is the reply I can return? Then, if I cannot possibly answer
the poor like ourselves, how shall I be bold enough, O my son, to
ask for the daughter of the Sultan of China-land who hath no peer
or behind or before him? Therefore do thou weigh this matter in
thy mind. Also who shall ask her to wife for the son of a snip?
Well indeed I wot that my saying aught of this kind will but
increase our misfortunes; for that it may be the cause of our
incurring mortal danger from the Sultan; peradventure even death
for thee and me. And, as concerneth myself, how shall I venture
upon such rash deed and perilous, O my son? and in what way shall
I ask the Sultan for his daughter to be thy wife; and, indeed,
how ever shall I even get access to him? And should I succeed
therein, what is to be my answer an they ask me touching thy
means? Haply the King will hold me to be a madwoman. And, lastly,
suppose that I obtain audience of the Sultan, what offering is
there I can submit to the King's majesty?"[FN#129]--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say,

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-third Night,
 
Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales;" whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin's mother continued to her son, " 'tis true, O
my child, that the Sultan is mild and merciful, never rejecting
any who approach him to require justice or ruth or protection,
nor any who pray him for a present; for he is liberal and
lavisheth favour upon near and far. But he dealeth his boons to
those deserving them, to men who have done some derring-do in
battle under his eyes or have rendered as civilians great service
to his estate. But thou! do thou tell me what feat thou hast
performed in his presence or before the public that thou meritest
from him such grace? And, secondly, this boon thou ambitionest is
not for one of our condition, nor is it possible that the King
grant to thee the bourne of thine aspiration; for whoso goeth to
the Sultan and craveth of him a favour, him it besitteth to take
in hand somewhat that suiteth the royal majesty, as indeed I
warned thee aforetime. How, then, shalt thou risk thyself to
stand before the Sultan and ask his daughter in marriage, when
thou hast with thee naught to offer him of that which beseemeth
his exalted station?" Hereto Alaeddin replied, "O my mother, thou
speakest to the point and hast reminded me aright and 'tis meet
that I revolve in mind the whole of thy remindings. But, O my
mother, the love of Princess Badr al-Budur hath entered into the
core of my heart; nor can I rest without I win her. However, thou
hast also recalled to me a matter which I forgot and 'tis this
emboldeneth me to ask his daughter of the King. Albeit thou, O my
mother, declarest that I have no gift which I can submit to the
Sultan, as is the wont of the world, yet in very sooth I have an
offering and a present whose equal, O my mother, I hold none of
the Kings to possess; no, nor even aught like it."--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin said to his mother, "Because verily that which
I deemed glass or crystal was nothing but precious stones and I
hold that all the Kings of the World have never possessed any
thing like one of the smallest thereof. For, by frequenting the
jeweller-folk, I have learned that they are the costliest gems
and these are what I brought in my pockets from the Hoard,
whereupon, an thou please, compose thy mind. We have in our house
a bowl of China porcelain; so arise thou and fetch it, that I may
fill it with these jewels, which thou shalt carry as a gift to
the King, and thou shalt stand in his presence and solicit him
for my requirement. I am certified that by such means the matter
will become easy to thee; and, if thou be unwilling, O my mother,
to strive for the winning of my wish as regards the lady Badr al-
Budur, know thou that surely I shall die. Nor do thou imagine
that this gift is of aught save the costliest of stones and be
assured, O my mother, that in my many visits to the Jewellers'
Bazar I have observed the merchants selling for sums man's
judgment may not determine jewels whose beauty is not worth one
quarter carat of what we possess; seeing which I was certified
t