shkhﬂs" (plural of Shakhs) vulgarly used,
throughout India, Persia and other Moslem realms, in the sense of
persons or individuals. For its lit. sig. see vols. iii. 26; and
viii. 159. The H. V. follows Galland in changing to pedestals the
Arab thrones, and makes the silken hanging a "piece of white
satin" which covers the unoccupied base.

[FN#23]  The blessed or well-omened: in these days it is mostly a
servile name, e.g. Sidi Mubﬂrak Bombay. See vol. ix. 58,330.

[FN#24]  In the test "M›n" for "Man," a Syro-Egyptian form common
throughout this MS.
 
[FN#25]  "Ay Ni'am," an emphatic and now vulgar expression. 

[FN#26]  The MS. here has "'Imﬂrah" = a building, probably a
clerical error for Maghﬂrah," a cave, a souterrain.

[FN#27]  Arab, "Zahab-raml›," explained in "Alaeddin." So
Al-Mutanabbi sang:--

"I become not of them because homed in their ground: * Sandy
     earth is the gangue wherein gold is found."

[FN#28]  Wal›mah prop. = a marriage-feast. For the different
kinds of entertainments see vols. vi. 74; viii. 231.

[FN#29]  Arab. Mukatta› al-Yadayn, a servile posture: see vols.
iii. 218; ix. 320.

[FN#30]  Here the Arabic has the advantage of the English;
"Shakhs" meaning either a person or an image. See supra, p. 11.

[FN#31]  Arab. "Kawﬂrij› = one who uses the paddle, a paddler, a
rower.

[FN#32]  In the Third Kalandar's Tale (vol. i. 143) Prince 'Aj›b
is forbidden to call upon the name of Allah, under pain of
upsetting the skiff paddled by the man of brass. Here the detail
is omitted.

[FN#33]  Arab. "Wahsh," which Galland translates "Tiger," and is
followed by his Hind. translator.

[FN#34]  Arab. "Laffa 'l-isnayn bi-zul∑mati-h," the latter word =
Khurt∑m, the trunk of an elephant, from Zalm = the dewlap of
sheep or goat.

[FN#35]  In the text "Yﬂmin," a copyist's error, which can mean
nothing else but "Yasim›n."

[FN#36]  The H. V. rejects this detail for "a single piece of
mother-o'-pearl twelve yards long," etc. Galland has une seule
ecaille de poisson. In my friend M. Zotenberg's admirable
translation of Tabara (i. 52) we read of a bridge at Baghdad made
of the ribs of Og bin 'Unk (= Og of the Neck), the fabled King of
Bashan.

[FN#37]  I have noted that this is the primitive attire of
Eastern man in all hot climates, and that it still holds its
ground in that grand survival of heathenry, the Meccan
Pilgrimage. In Galland the four strips are of taffetas jaune, the
Hind. "Taft›."

[FN#38]  The word is Hizﬂm = girdle, sash, waist-belt, which
Galland turns into nappes. The object of the cloths edged with
gems and gums was to form a barrier excluding hostile Jinns: the
European magician usually drew a magic circle.

[FN#39]  This is our corruption of the Malay Aigla = sandal wood.
See vol. ix. 150. 

[FN#40]  Lit. = the Day of Assembly, "Yaum al-Mahshar." These
lines were translated at Cannes on Feb. 22n, 1886, the day before
the earthquake which brought desolation upon the Riviera. It was
a second curious coincidence. On Thursday, July 10th, 1863--the
morning when the great earthquake at Accra laid in ruins the town
and the stout old fort built in the days of James II--I had been
reading the Koranic chapter entitled "Earthquakes" (No. XCIX.) to
some Moslem friends who had visited my quarters. Upwards of a
decade afterwards I described teh accident in "Ocean Highways"
(New Series, No. II., Vol. I, pp. 448-461), owned by Trubner &
Co., and edited by my friend Clements Markham, and I only regret
that this able Magazine has been extinguished by that dullest of
Journals, "Porceedings of the R. S. S. and monthly record of
Geography."

[FN#41]  Galland has un tremblement pareil ” celui qu'Israfyel
(Isrﬂf›l) doit causer le jour du jugement.

[FN#42]  The idea is Lady M. W. Montague's ("The Lady's
Resolve.")

          In part she is to blame that has been tried:
          He comes too near that comes to be denied.

As an unknown correspondent warns me the sentiment was probably
suggested by Sir Thomas Overbury ("A Wife." St. xxxvi):--

                                   --In part to blame is she
          Which hath without consent bin only tride:
          He comes too near that comes to be denide.

[FN#43]  These highly compromising magical articles are of many
kinds. The ballad of The Boy and the Mantle is familiar to all,
how in the case of Sir Kay's lady:--

          When she had tane the mantle
               With purpose for to wear;
          It shrunk up to her shoulder
               And left her backside bare.
                          Percy, Vol. I., i and Book III.

Percy derives the ballad from "Le COurt Mantel," an old French
piece and Mr. Evans (Specimens of Welsh Poetry) from an ancient
MS, of Tegan Earfron, one of Arthur's mistresses, who possessed a
mantle which would not fit immodest women. See also in Spenser,
Queen Florimel's Girdle (F.Q. iv. 5,3), and the detective is a
horn in the Morte d'Arthur, translated from the French, temp.
Edward IV., and first printed in A. D. 1484. The Spectator (No.
579) tells us "There was a Temple upon Mount Etna which was
guarded by dogs of so exquisite a smell, that they could discover
whether the Persons who came thither were chaste or not;" and
that they caused, as might be expected, immense trouble. The
test-article becomes in the Tuti-nﬂmeh the Tank of Trial at Agra;
also a nosegay which remains fresh or withers; in the Kathﬂ Sarit
Sﬂgara, the red lotus of Shiva; a shirt in Story lxix. Gesta
Romanorum; a cup in Ariosto; a rose-garland in "The Wright's
Chaste WIfe," edited by Mr. Furnival for the Early English Text
Society; a magic picture in Bandello, Part I., No. 21; a ring in
the Pentamerone, of Basile; and a distaff in "L'Adroite
Princesse," a French imitation of the latter.

[FN#44]  Looking glasses in the East are mostly made, like our
travelling mirrors, to open and shut. 

[FN#45]  In Eastern countries the oarsman stands to his work and
lessens his labour by applying his weight which cannot be done so
forcibly when sitting even upon the sliding-seat. In rowing as in
swimming we have forsaken the old custom and have lost instead of
gaining. 

[FN#46]  I have explained this word in vol. iii. 100; viii. 51,
etc., and may add the interpretation of Mr. L. C. Casartelli (p.
17) "La Philosophie Religieuse du Mazd⁄isme, etc., Paris
Maisonneuve, 1884." "A divine name, which has succeeded little
(?) is the ancient title Bagh, the O. P. Baga of the Cuneiforms
(Baga vazraka Auramazda, etc.) and the Bagha of the Avesta, whose
memory is preserved in Baghdad--the city created by the Gods (?).
The Pahlevi books show the word in the compound Bagh∂bakht, lit.
= what is granted by the Gods, popularly, Providence."

[FN#47]  The H. V. makes the old woman a "finished procuress
whose skill was unrivalled in that profession."

[FN#48]  In the text "Al-Sﬂd› w'al-Ghﬂd›:" the latter may mean
those who came for the morning meal. 

[FN#49]  An antistes, a leader in prayer (vols. ii. 203, and iv.
227); a reverend, against whom the normal skit is directed. The
H. V. makes him a Muezzin, also a Mosque-man; and changes his
name to Murad. Imﬂm is a word with a host of meanings, e.g.,
model (and master), a Sir-Oracle, the Caliph, etc., etc.

[FN#50]  i.e. being neighbours they would become to a certain
extent answerable for the crimes committed within the quarter.

[FN#51]  Arab. "Nakshat" and "Sifrat."

[FN#52]  Arab. "Faraj›yah," for which see vol. i. 210, 321.

[FN#53]  For this aphrodisiac see vol. vi. 60.

[FN#54]  In the text "Ay ni'am," still a popular expression.

[FN#55]  Arab. "'Ilm al-H›ah," gen. translated Astrology, but
here meaning scientific Physiognomy. All these branches of
science, including Palmistry, are nearly connected; the features
and the fingers, mounts, lines, etc. being referred to the sun,
moon and planets. 

[FN#56]  Arab. "Mihaffah bi-takhtrawﬂn": see vols. ii. 180; v.
175.

[FN#57]  The H. V. is more explicit: "do not so, or the King of
the Jann will slay thee even before thou canst enjoy her and will
carry her away."

[FN#58]  Arab. "Shahwah" the rawest and most direct term. The
Moslem religious has no absurd shame of this natural passion. I
have heard of a Persian Imam, who, suddenly excited as he was
sleeping in a friend's house, awoke the master with, "Shahwah
dﬂram" = "I am lustful" and was at once gratified by a "Mut'ah,"
temporary and extempore marriage to one of the slave-girls. These
morganatic marriages are not, I may note, allowed to the Sunnis.

[FN#59]  Arab. "Min ba'di an" for "Min ba'di mﬂ" = after that,
still popular in the latter broad form.

[FN#60]  The word has been used in this tale with a threefold
sense Egypt, old Cairo (Fostat) and new Cairo, in fact to the
land and to its capital for the time being.

[FN#61]  Arab. "Kabbaltu" = I have accepted, i.e., I accept
emphatically. Arabs use this form in sundry social transactions,
such as marriages, sales, contracts, bargains, and so forth, to
denote that the engagement is irrevocable and that no change can
be made. De Sacy neglected to note this in his Grammar, but
explains it in his Chrestomathy (i. 44, 53), and rightly adds
that the use of this energetic form peut-€tre serait susceptible
d'applications plus ⁄tendues.

[FN#62]  La nuit de l'entr⁄e, say the French: see Lane "Leylet
ed-dukhlah" (M.E. chapt. vi.).

[FN#63]  This MS. uses "Milﬂh" (pleasant) for "Mubﬂh"
(permitted). I must remark, before parting with Zayn al-Asnam,
that its object is to inculcate that the price of a good wife is
"far above rubies" (Prov. xxxi. 10: see the rest of this fine
chapter), a virtuous woman being "a crown to her husband" (ibid.
xxii. 4); and "a prudent wife is from the Lord" (Prov. xix. 4).
The whole tale is told with extreme delicacy and the want of
roughness and energy suggests a European origin.

[FN#64]  i.e. the "Height or Glory ('Alﬂ) of the Faith (al-D›n)"
pron. Alﬂaddeen; which is fairly represented by the old form
"Aladdin;" and better by De Sacy's "Ala-eddin." The name has
occurred in The Nights, vol. iv. 29-33; it is a household word in
England and who has not heard of THomas Hood's "A-lad-in?"
Easterns write it in five different ways and in the Paris MS. it
is invariably "ÊAl› al-d›n," which is a palpable mistake. The
others are (1) 'Alﬂ al-D›n, (2) 'Alﬂ yad›n, (3) 'Alah D›n in the
H. V. and (4) 'Alﬂa al-D›n (with the Hamzah), the last only being
grammatical. In Galland the Histoire de la Lampe merveilleuse is
preceded by the Histoire du Dormeur Eveill⁄ which, being "The
Story of Ab∑ al-Hasan the Wag, or the Sleeper awakened," of the
Bresl. Edit. (Nights cclxxi.-ccxc.), is here omitted. The
Alaeddin Story exists in germ in Tale ii. of the "Dravidian
Nights Entertainments," (Madana Kamara-Sankﬂdﬂj), by Pandit S. M.
Natisa Shastri (Madras, 1868, and London, Tr≥bner). We are told
by Mr. Coote that it is well represented in Italy. The Messina
version is by Pittﬁ, "La Lanterna Magica," also the Palermitan
"Lanterne;" it is "Il Matrimonio di Cajussi" of Rome (R. H.
Busk's Folk-lore); "Il Gallo e il Mago," of Visentini's "Fiabe
Mantovane," and the "Pesciolino," and "Il Contadino che aveva tre
F›gli," of Imbriana. In "La Fanciulla c il Mago," of De
Gubernatis ("Novelline di Sante Stefano de Calcenaja," p. 47),
occurs the popular incident of the original. "The Magician was
not a magician for nothing. He feigned to be a hawker and fared
through the streets, crying out, 'Donne, donne, chi baratta
anelli di ferro contra anelli di argento?'"

Alaeddin has ever been a favourite with the stage. Early in the
present century it was introduced to the Parisian opera by M.
Etienne, to the Feydeau by Th⁄aulon's La Clochette: to the
Gymnase by La Petite-Lampe of M. Scribe and Melesville, and to
teh Panorama Dramatique by MM. Merle, Cartouche and Saintine
(Gauttier, vii. 380). 

[FN#65]  This MS. always uses D›nﬂrzﬂd like Galland. 

[FN#66]  Arab.  "ÊAbadan," a term much used in this MS. and used
correctly. It refers always and only to future time, past being
denoted by "Kattu" from Katta = he cut (in breadth, as opposed to
Kadda=he cut lengthwise). See De Sacy, Chrestom. ii. 443.

[FN#67]  In the text "Ibn m›n," a vulgarism for "man." Galland
adds that the tailor's name was Mustapha--i  y avait un tailleur
nomm⁄ Mustafa.

[FN#68]  In classical Arabic the word is "Maghribi," the local
form of the root Gharaba= he went far away (the sun), set, etc.,
whence "Maghribi"=a dweller in the Sunset-land. The vulgar,
however, prefer "Maghrab" and "Maghrabi," of which foreigners
made "Mogrebin." For other information see vols. vi. 220; ix. 50.
The "Moormen" are famed as magicians; so we find a Maghrabi
Sahhﬂr=wizard, who by the by takes part in a transformation scene
like that of the Second Kalandar (vol. i. p. 134, The Nights), in
p. 10 of Spitta Bey's "Contes Arabes Modernes," etc. I may note
that "Sihr," according to Jauhari and Firozﬂbﬂdi=anything one can
hold by a thin or subtle place, i.e., easy to handle. Hence it
was applied to all sciences, "Sahhﬂr" being=to 'Alim (or sage) .
and the older Arabs called poetry "Sihar al-halﬂl"--lawful magic.

[FN#69]  i.e. blood is thicker than water, as the Highlanders
say.

[FN#70]  A popular saying amongst Moslems which has repeatedly
occurred in The Nights. The son is the "lamp of a dark house." 
Vol. ii 280.

[FN#71]  Out of respect to his brother, who was probably the
senior: the H. V. expressly says so.

[FN#72]  Al-Marh∑m = my late brother. See vol. ii. 129, 196.

[FN#73]  This must refer to Cairo not to Al-Medinah whose title
is "Al-Munawwarah" = the Illumined.

[FN#74]  A picturesque term for birth-place.

[FN#75]  In text "Yﬂ Rﬂjul" (for Rajul) = O man, an Egypto-Syrian
form, broad as any Doric.

[FN#76]  Arab. Sh∑f-hu, the colloquial form of Shuf-hu

[FN#77]  For the same sentiment see "Julnﬂr" the "Sea born,"
Nights dccxliii.-xliv.

[FN#78]  "I will hire thee a shop in the Chauk"--Carfax or
market-street says the H. V.

[FN#79]  The MS. writes the word Khwﬂjﬂ (for Khwﬂjah see vol. vi.
46). Here we are at once interested in the scapegrace who looked
Excelsior. In fact the tale begins with a strong inducement to
boyish vagabondage and scampish indolence; but the Moslem would
see in it the hand of Destiny bringing good out of evil. Amongst
other meanings of "Khwﬂjah " it is a honorific title given by
Khorﬂsﬂnis to their notables. In Arab. the similarity of the word
to "Khuwﬂj"=hunger, has given rise to a host of conceits, more or
less frigid (Ibn Khallikﬂn, iii. 45).

[FN#80]  Arab. "Wﬂhid min al-Tujjﬂr," the very vulgar style.

[FN#81]  i.e., the Saturday (see vol. ii. 305) established as a
God's rest by the so-called "Mosaic" commandment No. iv. How it
gradually passed out of observance, after so many centuries of
most stringent application, I cannot discover: certainly the text
in Cor. ii. 16-17 is insufficient to abolish or supersede an
order given with such singular majesty and impressiveness by God
and so strictly obeyed by man. The popular idea is that the
Jewish Sabbath was done away with in Christ, and that sundry of
the 1604 councils, e.g., Laodicea, anathematized those who kept
it holy after such fashion. With the day the aim and object
changed; and the early Fathers made it the "Feast of the
Resurrection" which could not be kept too joyously. The
"Sabbatismus" of our Sabbatarians, who return to the Israelitic
practice and yet honour the wrong day, is heretical and vastly
illogical; and the Sunday is better kept in France, Italy and
other "Catholic" countries than in England and Scotland.

[FN#82]  For "Mushayyadﬂt" see vol. viii. 23.

[FN#83]  All these words sﬂr∑, dakhal∑, jalas∑, &c. are in the
plur. for the dual--popular and vulgar speech. It is so
throughout the MS.

[FN#84]  The Persians apply the Arab word "Sahrﬂ"=desert, to the
waste grounds about a town.

[FN#85]  Arab. Kashﬂk›sh from the quadril, kashkasha = he
gathered fuel.

[FN#86]  In text "Shayy bi-lﬂsh" which would mean lit. a thing
gratis or in vain.

[FN#87]  In the text "Sabba raml" = cast in sand. It may be a
clerical error for "Zaraba Raml" = he struck sand, i.e., made
geomantic figures.

[FN#88]  Arab. Mauza'= a place, an apartment, a saloon.

[FN#89]  Galland makes each contain quatre vases de bronze,
grands comme des cuves.

[FN#90]  The Arab. is "L›wﬂn," for which see vols. iv. 71 and
vii. 347. Galland translates it by a "terrace" and "niche."

[FN#91]  The idea is borrowed from the lume eterno of the
Rosicrucians. It is still prevalent throughout Syria where the
little sepulchral lamps buried by the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans
are so called. Many tales are told of their being found burning
after the lapse of centuries; but the traveller will never see
the marvel.

[FN#92]  The first notice of the signet-ring and its adventures
is by Herodotus in the Legend of the Samian Polycrates; and here
it may be observed that the accident is probably founded on fact;
every fisherman knows that fish will seize and swallow spoon-bait
and other objects that glitter. The text is the Talmudic version
of Solomon's seal-ring. The king of the demons after becoming a
"Bottle-imp," prayed to be set free upon condition of teaching a
priceless secret, and after cajoling the Wise One flung his
signet into the sea and cast the owner into a land four hundred
miles distant. Here David's son begged his bread till he was made
head cook to the King of Ammon at Mash Kern›n. After a while, he
eloped with Na'∑zah, the daughter of his master, and presently
when broiling a fish found therein his missing property. In the
Moslem version, Solomon had taken prisoner Am›nah, the daughter
of a pagan prince, and had homed her in his Harem, where she
taught him idolatry. One day before going to the Hammam he
entrusted to her his signet- ring presented to him by the four
angelic Guardians of sky, air, water and earth when the mighty
Jinni Al-Sakhr (see vol. i. 41; v. 36), who was hovering about
unseen, snatching away the ring, assumed the king's shape,
whereby Solomon's form became so changed that his courtiers drove
him from his own doors. Thereupon Al-Sakhr, taking seat upon the
throne, began to work all manner of iniquity, till one of the
Wazirs, suspecting the transformation, read aloud from a scroll
of the law: this caused the demon to fly shrieking and to drop
the signet into the sea. Presently Solomon, who had taken service
with a fisherman, and received for wages two fishes a day, found
his ring and made Al-Sakhr a "Bottle-imp." The legend of St.
Kentigern or Mungo of Glasgow, who recovered the Queen's ring
from the stomach of a salmon, is a palpable imitation of the
Biblical incident which paid tribute to C sar.

[FN#93]  The Magician evidently had mistaken the powers of the
Ring. This is against all probability and possibility, but on
such abnormal traits are tales and novels founded.

[FN#94]  These are the Gardens of the Hesperides and of King
Isope (Tale of Beryn, Supplem. Canterbury Tales, Chaucer Soc. p.
84):--

          In mydward of this gardyn stant a feir⁄ tre 
          Of alle manner levis that under sky be 
          I-forgit and i- fourmyd, eche in his degre 
          Of sylver, and of golde fyne, that lusty been to see.

So in the Kathﬂ (S. S.) there are trees with trunks of gold,
branches of pearls, and buds and flowers of clear white pearls.

[FN#95]  The text causes some confusion by applying "Sullam" to
staircase and ladder, hence probably the latter is not mentioned
by Galland and Co., who speak only of an escalier de cinquante
marches. "Sullam" (plur. "Salﬂlim") in modern Egyptian is
popularly used for a flight of steps: see Spitta-Bey's "Contes
Arabes Modernes," p. 70. The H. V. places under the slab a hollow
space measuring four paces (kadam = 2.5 feet), and at one corner
a wicket with a ladder. This leads to a vault of three rooms, one
with the jars of gold; the second not to be swept by the skirts,
and the third opening upon the garden of gems. "There thou shalt
see a path, whereby do thou fare straight forwards to a lofty
palace with a flight of fifty steps leading to a flat terrace:
and here shalt thou find a niche wherein a lamp burneth."

[FN#96]  In the H.V. he had thrust the lamp into the bosom of his
dress, which, together with his sleeves, he had filled full of
fruit, and had wound his girdle tightly around him lest any fall
out.

[FN#97]  Africa (Arab. Afrik›yah) here is used in its old and
classical sense for the limited tract about Carthage (Tunis) net,
Africa Propria. But the scribe imagines it to be the P. N. of a
city: so m J∑dar (vol. vi. 222) we find Fﬂs and Miknﬂs (Fez and
Mequinez) converted into one settlement. The Maghribi,
Mauritanian or Maroccan is famed for sorcery throughout the
Moslem world: see vol. vi. 220. The Moslem "Kingdom of Afrikiyah"
was composed of four provinces, Tunis, Tripoli, Constantina, and
Bugia: and a considerable part of it was held by the Berber tribe
of Sanhﬂja or Sinhﬂga, also called the Zenag whence our modern
"Senegal." Another noted tribe which held Bajaiyah (Bugia) in
Afrikiyah proper was the "Zawﬂwah," the European "Zouaves," (Ibn
Khall. iv. 84).

[FN#98]  Galland omits the name, which is outlandish enough.

[FN#99]  Meaning that he had incurred no blood-guiltiness, as he
had not killed the lad and only left him to die.

[FN#100]  The H. V. explains away the improbability of the
Magician forgetting his gift. "In this sore disquietude he
bethought him not of the ring which, by the decree of Allah, was
the means of Alaeddin's escape; and indeed not only he but oft
times those who practice the Black Art are baulked of their
designs by Divine Providence."

[FN#101]  See vol. vii. 60. The word is mostly derived from "
'afar" = dust, and denotes, according to some, a man coloured
like the ground or one who "dusts" all his rivals. " 'Ifr" (fem.
'Ifrah) is a wicked and dangerous man. Al-Jannabi, I may here
notice, is the chief authority for Afrikus son of Abraha and
xviiith Tobba being the eponymus of "Africa."

[FN#102]  Arab. "Ghayr an" = otherwise that, except that, a
favourite form in this MS. The first word is the Syriac "Gheir" =
for, a conjunction which is most unneccessarily derived by some
from the Gr. {Greek}.

[FN#103]  Galland and the H.V. make the mother deliver a little
hygienic lecture about not feeding too fast after famine: exactly
what an Eastern parent would not dream of doing.

[FN#104]  The lad now turns the tables upon his mother and
becomes her master, having "a crow to pick" with her.

[FN#105]  Arab. "Munﬂfik" for whose true sense, "an infidel who
pretendeth to believe in Al-Islam," see vol. vi. p. 207. Here the
epithet comes last being the climax of abuse, because the lowest
of the seven hells (vol. viii. 111) was created for "hypocrites,"
i.e., those who feign to be Moslems when they are Miscreants.

[FN#106]  Here a little abbreviation has been found necessary to
avoid the whole of a twice-told tale; but nothing material has
been omitted.

[FN#107]  Arab. "Taffaytu-hu." This is the correct term = to
extinguish. They relate of the great scholar Firozﬂbﬂd›, author
of the "Kﬂm∑s" (ob. A. H. 817 = A. D. 1414), that he married a
Badawi wife in order to study the purest Arabic and once when
going to bed said to her, "Uktuli's-sirﬂj," the Persian "Chirﬂgh-
rﬂ bi-kush" = Kill the lamp. "What," she cried, "Thou an ' lim
and talk of killing the lamp instead of putting it out!"

[FN#108]  In the H. V. the mother takes the "fruits" and places
them upon the ground, "but when darkness set in, a light shone
from them like the rays of a lamp or the sheen of the sun."

[FN#109]  For these fabled Giant rulers of Syria, Og King of
Bashan, etc., see vols. vii. 84; ix. 109, 323. D'Herbelot (s. v.
Giabbar= Giant) connects "Jabﬂbirah" with the Heb. Ghibbor
Ghibborim and the Pers. D›v, Divﬂn: of these were ' d and
Shaddﬂd, Kings of Syria: the Falast"in (Philistines) 'Auj, Amﬂlik
and Ban∑ Shayth or Seth's descendants, the sons of God (Benu-
Elohim) of the Book of Genesis (vi. 2) who inhabited Mount Hermon
and lived in purity and chastity.

[FN#110]  The H. V. explains that the Jinni had appeared to the
mother in hideous aspect, with noise and clamour, because she had
scoured the Lamp roughly; but was more gentle with Alaeddin
because he had rubbed it lightly. This is from Galland.

[FN#111]  Arab. Musawwadatayn = lit. two black things, rough
copies, etc.

[FN#112]  Arab. Ban∑ Adam, as opposed to Ban∑ Elohim (Sons of the
Gods), B. al-Jﬂnn etc The Ban∑ al-Asfar = sons of the yellow, are
Esau's posterity in Edom, also a term applied by Arab historians
to the Greeks and Romans whom Jewish fable derived from Idum a:
in my vol. ii. 220, they are the people of the yellow or tawny
faces. For the legend see Ibn Khall. iii. 8, where the translator
suggests that the by-name may be = the "sees of the Emperor"
Flavius, confounded with "flavus," a title left by Vespasian to
his successors The Ban∑ al Khashkhash = sons of the (black) poppy
are the Ethiopians.

[FN#113]  Arab, Hﬂ! hﬂ! so Hﬂka (fem. Haki) = Here for thee!

[FN#114]  So in Medieval Europe Papal bulls and Kings' letters
were placed for respect on the head. See Duffield's "Don
Quixote," Part i. xxxi.

[FN#115]  Galland makes the Juif only rus⁄ et adroit.

[FN#116]  Arab. "Ghash›m" = a "Johnny Raw" from the root "Ghashm"
= iniquity: Builders apply the word to an unhewn stone; addressed
to a person it is considered slighting, if not insulting. See
vol. ii. 330.

[FN#117]  The carat (K›rﬂt) being most often, but not always, one
twenty-fourth of the diner. See vols. iii. 239; vii. 289.

[FN#118]  Kanﬂn›, plur. of Kinn›nah.

[FN#119]  Here and below silver is specified, whenas the platters
in Night dxxxv. were of gold This is one of the many changes'
contradictions and confusions which are inherent in Arab stones.
See Spitta-Bey's "Contes Arabes," Preface.

[FN#120]  i.e., the Slave of the Lamp.

[FN#121]  This may be true, but my experience has taught me to
prefer dealing with a Jew than with a Christian. The former will
"jew" me perhaps, but his commercial cleverness will induce him
to allow me some gain in order that I may not be quite
disheartened: the latter will strip me of my skin and will
grumble because he cannot gain more.

[FN#122]  Arab. "Hﬂlah  mutawassitah," a phrase  which has a
European  Touch.

[FN#123]  In the text "Jauharj›yyah," common enough in Egypt and
Syria, an Arab. plur. of an Arabised Turkish sing.--ji for--ch› =
(crafts-) man.

[FN#124]  We may suppose some years may have passed in this
process and that Alaeddin from a lad of fifteen had reached the
age of manhood. The H. V. declares that for many a twelve month
the mother and son lived by cotton spinning and the sale of the
plate

[FN#125]  i.e. Full moon of full moons: See vol. iii. 228. It is
pronounced "Badroo'l- Budoor," hence Galland's " Badr-oul-
boudour. "

[FN#126]  In the H. V. Alaeddin "bethought him of a room adjacent
to the Baths where he might sit and see the Princess through the
door-chinks, when she raised her veil before the handmaids and
eunuchs."

[FN#127]  This is the common conceit of the brow being white as
day and the hair black as night.

[FN#128]  Such a statement may read absurdly to the West but it
is true in the East. "Selim" had seen no woman's face unveiled,
save that of his sable mother Rosebud in Morier's Tale of Yeldoz,
the wicked woman ("The Mirza," vol. iii. 135). The H. V. adds
that Alaeddin's mother was old and verily had little beauty even
in her youth. So at the sight of the Princess he learnt that
Allah had created women exquisite in loveliness and heart-
ensnaring; and at first glance the shaft of love pierced his
heart and he fell to the ground afaint He loved her with a
thousand lives and, when his mother questioned him, "his lips
formed no friendship with his speech."

[FN#129]  "There is not a present (Teshurah) to bring to the Man
of God" (1 Sam. ix. 7), and Menachem explains Teshurah as a gift
offered with the object of being admitted to the presence. See
also the offering of oil to the King in Isaiah lvii. 9. Even in
Maundriell's Day Travels (p. 26) it was counted uncivil to visit
a dignitary without an offering in hand.

[FN#130]  As we shall see further on, the magical effect of the
Ring and the Lamp extend far and wide over the physique and
morale of the owner: they turn a "raw laddie" into a finished
courtier, warrior, statesman, etc.

[FN#131]  In Eastern states the mere suspicion of having such an
article would expose the suspected at least to torture. Their
practical system of treating "treasure trove," as I saw when
serving with my regiment in Gujarﬂt (Guzerat), is at once to
imprison and "molest" the finder, in order to make sure that he
has not hidden any part of his find.

[FN#132]  Here the MS. text is defective, the allusion is, I
suppose, to the Slave of the Lamp.

[FN#133]  In the H. V. the King retired into his private
apartment; and, dismissing all save the Grand Wazir, "took
cognisance of special matters" before withdrawing to the Harem.

[FN#134]  The lev⁄e, Divan or Darbﬂr being also a lit de justice
and a Court of Cassation: See vol. i. 29.

[FN#135]  All this is expressed by the Arabic in one word
"Tamannﬂ." Galland adds pour marquer qu'il etait pr€t ﬂ perdre
s'il y manquait; and thus he conveys a wrong idea.

[FN#136]  This would be still the popular address, nor is it
considered rude or slighting. In John (ii. 4) "Atto," the Heb.
Eshah, is similarly used, not complimentarily, but in popular
speech.

[FN#137]  This sounds ridiculous enough in English, but not in
German, e.g. Deine K˜nigliche Hoheit is the formula de rigueur
when an Austrian officer, who always addresses brother-soldiers
in the familiar second person, is speaking to a camarade who is
also a royalty.

[FN#138]  "Surﬂyyﬂt (lit. = the Pleiades) and "Sham'ﬂd›n" a
would-be Arabic plur. of the Persian "Sham'adﬂn"=candlestick,
chandelier, for which more correctly Sham'adﬂnﬂt is used.

[FN#139]  i.e., betrothed to her--j'agr⁄e la proposition, says
Galland.

[FN#140]  Here meaning Eunuch-officers and officials. In the
cdlxxvith Night of this volume the word is incorrectly written
 ghﬂt in the singular.

[FN#141]  In the H. V. Alaeddin on hearing this became as if a
thunderbolt had stricken him, and losing consciousness, swooned
away.

[FN#142]  These calls for food at critical times, and oft-
recurring allusions to eating are not yet wholly obsolete amongst
the civilised of the xixth century. The ingenious M. Jules Verne
often enlivens a tedious scene by Dejeunons! And French
travellers, like English, are not unready to talk of food and
drink, knowing that the subject is never displeasing to their
readers.

[FN#143]  The H. V. gives a sketch of the wedding. "And when the
ceremonies ended at the palace with pomp and parade and pageant,
and the night was far spent, the eunuchs led the Wazir's son into
the bridal chamber. He was the first to seek his couch; then the
Queen his mother-in-law, came into him leading the bride, and
followed by her suite. She did with her virgin daughter as
parents are wont to do, removed her wedding-raiment, and donning
a night-dress, placed her in her bridegroom's arms. Then, wishing
her all joy, she with her ladies went away and shut the door. At
that instant came the Jinni," etc.

[FN#144]  The happy idea of the wedding night in the water-closet
is repeated from the tale of Nur-al-D›n Ali Hasan (vol. i. 221),
and the mishap of the Hunchback bridegroom.

[FN#145]  For the old knightly practice of sleeping with a drawn
sword separating man and maid see vol. vii. 353 and Mr.
Clouston's "Popular Tales and Fictions," vol. i. 316. In Poland
the intermediary who married by procuration slept alongside the
bride in all his armour. The H. V. explains, "He (Alaeddin) also
lay a naked sword between him and the Princess so she might
perceive that he was ready to die by that blade should he attempt
to do aught of villainy by the bride."

[FN#146]  Galland says: Ils ne s'aper˛urent que de l'⁄branlement
du lit et que de leur transport d'un lieu ﬂ l'autre: c'⁄tait bien
assez pour leur donner une frayeur qu'il est ais⁄ d'imaginer.

[FN#147]  Galland very unnecessarily makes the Wazir's son pass
into the wardrobe (garderobe) to dress himself.

[FN#148]  Professional singing and dancing girls: Properly the
word is the fem. Of ' lim = a learned man; but it has been
anglicised by Byron's

          "The long chibouque's dissolving cloud supply  
          Where dance the Almahs to wild minstrelsy."
            --(The Corsair, ii. 2.) 

They go about the streets with unveiled faces and are seldom
admitted into respectable Harems, although on festal occasions
they perform in the court or in front of the house, but even this
is objected to by the Mrs. Grundy of Egypt. Lane (M.E. chap.
xviii.) derives with Saint Jerome the word from the Heb. or
Phoenician Almah = a virgin, a girl, a singing- girl; and thus
explains "Alﬂmoth" in Psalms xlvi. and I Chron. xv. 20. Parkhurst
(s.v. 'Alamah = an undeflowered virgin) renders Job xxxix. 30,
"the way of a man with a maid" (bi-ﬂlmah). The way of a man in
his virgin state, shunning youthful lust and keeping himself
"pure and unspotted."

[FN#149]  The text reads "Rafa' " (he raised) "al-Bashkhﬂnah"
which in Suppl. Nights (ii. 119) is a hanging, a curtain.
Apparently it is a corruption of the Pers. "Paskhkhﬂnah," a
mosquito-curtain.

[FN#150]  The father suspected that she had not gone to bed a
clean maid.

[FN#151]  Arab. Aysh = Ayyu Shayyin and Laysh = li ayyi Shayyin.
This vulgarism, or rather popular corruption, is of olden date
and was used by such a purist as Al-Mutanabbi in such a phrase as
"Aysh Khabara-k?" = how art thou? See Ibn Khallikan, iii. 79.

[FN#152]  In the H. V. the Minister sends the Chob-dﬂr= = rod-
bearer, mace-bearer, usher, etc.

[FN#153]  In the text Sﬂhal for Sahal, again the broad "Doric" of
Syria.

[FN#154]  Arab. Dahab ramli = gold dust washed out of the sand,
placer-gold. I must excuse myself for using this Americanism,
properly a diluvium or deposit of sand, and improperly (Bartlett)
a find of drift gold. The word, like many mining terms in the Far
West, is borrowed from the Spaniards; it is not therefore one of
the many American vulgarisms which threaten hopelessly to defile
the pure well of English speech.

[FN#155]  Abra. "Ratl," by Europeans usually pronounced "Rotl"
(Rotolo).

[FN#156]  In the H. V. she returns from the bazar; and, "seeing
the house filled with so many persons in goodliest attire,
marvelled greatly. Then setting down the meat lately bought she
would have taken off her veil, but Alaeddin prevented her and
said," etc.

[FN#157]  The word is popularly derived from Serai in Persian = a
palace; but it comes from the Span. and Port. Cerrar = to shut
up, and should be written with the reduplicated liquid.

[FN#158]  In the H. V. the dresses and ornaments of the slaves
were priced at ten millions (Kar∑r a crore) of gold coins. I have
noticed that Messer Marco "Milione" did not learn his high
numerals in Arabia, but that India might easily have taught them
to him.

[FN#159]  Arab. "Rﬂih yas›r," peasant's language.

[FN#160]  Arab. Kﬂ'ah, the apodyterium or undressing room upon
which the vestibule of the Hammam opens. See the plan in Lane's
M. E. chaps. xvi. The Kﬂr'ah is now usually called "Maslakh" =
stripping-room.

[FN#161]  Arab. "Hammam-hu" = went through all the operations of
the Hammam, scraping, kneading, soaping, wiping and so forth.

[FN#162]  For this aphrodisiac see vol. vi. 60. The subject of
aphrodisiacs in the East would fill a small library: almost every
medical treatise ends in a long disquisition upon fortifiers,
provocatives' etc. We may briefly divide them into three great
classes. The first is the medicinal, which may be either external
or internal. The second is the mechanical, such as scarification'
flagellation, and the application of insects as practiced by
certain savage races. There is a venerable Joe Miller of an old
Brahmin whose young wife always insisted, each time before he
possessed her, upon his being stung by a bee in certain parts.
The third is magical superstitious and so forth

[FN#163]  This may sound exaggerated to English ears, but a petty
Indian Prince, such as the Gﬂikwﬂr, or Rajah of Baroda, would be
preceded in state processions by several led horses all whose
housings and saddles were gold studded with diamonds. The sight
made one's mouth water.

[FN#164]  i.e. the ÊArab al-'Arbﬂ; for which see vols. i. 112; v.
101.

[FN#165]  Arab. "Al-Kand›l al-'aj›b:" here its magical virtues
are specified and remove many apparent improbabilities from the
tale.

[FN#166]  This was the highest of honours. At Abyssinian Harar
even the Grandees were compelled to dismount at the door of the
royal "compound." See my "First Footsteps in East Africa," p.
296.

[FN#167]  "The right hand" seems to me a European touch in
Galland's translation, leur chef mit Aladdin a sa droite. Amongst
Moslems the great man sits in the sinistral corner of the Divan
as seen from the door, so the place of honour is to his left.

[FN#168]  Arab. "M∑sikﬂ," classically "Musik›" ={Greek}: the
Pers. form is M∑sikﬂr; and the  Arab. equivalent is Al-Lahn. In
the H. V. the King made a signal and straightway drums (dhol) and
trumpets (traf›r) and all manner wedding instruments struck up on
every side.

[FN#169]  Arab.  Marmar Sumﬂki=porphyry of which ancient Egypt
supplied the finest specimens. I found a vein of it in the Anti-
Libanus. Strange to say, the quarries which produced the far-
famed giallo antico, verd' antico (serpentine limestone) and
rosso antico (mostly a porphyry) worked by the old Nilotes, are
now unknown to us.

[FN#170]  i.e. velvets with gold embroidery: see vol. viii. 201.

[FN#171]  The Arabic says, "There was a kiosque with four-and-
twenty alcoves (L›wﬂn, for which see vols. iv. 71, vi. 347) all
builded of emerald, etc., and one remained with the kiosque
(kushk) unfinished." I adopt Galland's reading salon ﬂ vingt-
quatre crois⁄es which are mentioned in the Arab. text towards the
end of the tale, and thus avoid the confusion between kiosque and
window. In the H. V. there is a domed belvedere (bﬂrah-dari-i-
gumbaz-dﬂr), four-sided, with six doors on each front (i. e.
twenty-four), and all studded with diamonds, etc.

[FN#172]  In Persia this is called "Pﬂ-andﬂz," and must be
prepared for the Shah when he deigns to visit a subject. It is
always of costly stuffs, and becomes the perquisite of the royal
attendants.

[FN#173]  Here the European hand again appears to me: the Sultan
as a good Moslem should have made the Wuz∑-ablution and prayed
the dawn-prayers  before doing anything worldly.

[FN#174]  Arab. F› ghuz∑ni zﬂlika," a peculiar phrase, Ghazn=a
crease, a wrinkle.

[FN#175]  In the H. V. the King "marvelled to see Alaeddin's
mother without her veil and magnificently adorned with costly
jewels and said in his mind, ÊMethought she was a grey-haired
crone, but I find her still in the prime of life and comely to
look upon, somewhat after the fashion of Badr al-Bud∑r.' "  This
also was one of the miracles of the Lamp.

[FN#176]  For this word see vols. i. 46, vii. 326. A Joe Miller
is told in Western India of an old General Officer boasting his
knowledge of Hindostani. "How do you say, Tell a plain story,
General?" asked one of the hearers, and the answer was, "Maydﬂn
k› bﬂt bolo!" = "speak a word about the plain" (or level space).

[FN#177]  The prehistoric Arabs: see supra p. 98.

[FN#178]  Popularly, Jer›d, the palm-frond used as javelin: see
vol. vi. 263.

[FN#179]  In order to keep off the evil eye, one of the functions
of iron and steel: see vol. ii. 316.

[FN#180]  The H. V. adds, "Little did the Princess know that the
singers were fairies whom the Slave of the Lamp had brought
together."

[FN#181]  Alexander the Great: see v. 252, x. 57. The H. V. adds,
"Then only one man and one woman danced together, one with other,
till midnight, when Alaeddin and the Princess stood up, for it
was the wont of China in those days that bride and bridegroom
perform together in presence of the wedding company."

[FN#182]  The exceptional reserve of this and other descriptions
makes M. H. Zotenberg suspect that the tale was written for one
of the Mameluke Princesses: I own to its modesty but I doubt that
such virtue would have recommended it to the dames in question.
The H. V. adds a few details:--"Then, when the bride and
bridegroom had glanced and gazed each at other's face, the
Princess rejoiced with excessive joy to behold his comeliness,
and he exclaimed, in the courtesy of his gladness, ÊO happy me,
whom thou deignest, O Queen of the Fair, to honour despite mine
unworth, seeing that in thee all charms and graces are
perfected.' "

[FN#183]  The term has not escaped ridicule amongst Moslems. A
common fellow having stood in his way the famous wit Ab∑ al-'Aynﬂ
asked "What is that?" "A man of the Sons of Adam" was the reply.
"Welcome, welcome," cried the other, "Allah grant thee length of
days. I deemed that all his sons were dead." See Ibn Khallikan
iii. 57.

[FN#184]  This address to an inanimate object (here a window) is
highly idiomatic and must be cultivated by the practical Arabist.
In the H. V. the unfinished part is the four-and-twentieth door
of the fictitious (ja'al›) palace.

[FN#185]  This is true Orientalism, a personification or
incarnation which Galland did not think proper to translate.

[FN#186]  Arab. "La'ab al-Andﬂb;" the latter word is from "Nadb"
= brandishing or throwing the javelin.

[FN#187]  The "mothers" are the prime figures, the daughters
being the secondary. For the " 'Ilm al-Ram!" = (Science of the
sand) our geomancy, see vol. iii. 269, and D'Herbelot's sub. v.
Raml or Reml.

[FN#188]  This is from Galland, whose certaine boisson chaude
evidently means tea. It is preserved in the H.V.

[FN#189]  i.e. his astrolabe, his "Z›j" or table of the stars,
his almanack, etc. For a highly fanciful derivation of the
"Arstable" see Ibn Khallikan (iii. 580). He makes it signify
"balance or lines (Pers. ÊAstur') of the sun," which is called
"Lﬂb" as in the case of wicked Queen Lﬂb (The Nights, vol. vii.
296). According to him the Astrolabe was suggested to Ptolemy by
an armillary sphere which had accidentally been flattened by the
hoof of his beast: this is beginning late in the day, the
instrument was known to the ancient Assyrians. Chardin (Voyages
ii. 149) carefully describes the Persian variety of--

          "The cunning man highs Sidrophil

(as Will. Lilly was called). Amongst other things he wore at his
girdle an astrolabe not bigger than the hollow of a man's hand,
often two to three inches in diameter and looking at a distance
like a medal." These men practiced both natural astrology =
astronomy, as well as judicial astrology which foretells events
and of which Kepler said that "she, albeit a fool, was the
daughter of a wise mother, to whose support and life the silly
maid was indispensable." Isidore of Seville (A. D. 600-636) was
the first to distinguish between the two branches, and they
flourished side by side till Newton's day. Hence the many
astrological terms in our tongue, e.g. consider, contemplate,
disaster, jovial, mercurial, saturnine, etc.

[FN#190]  In the H. V. "New brass lamps for old ones! who will
exchange ?" So in the story of the Fisherman's son, a Jew who had
been tricked of a cock, offers to give new rings for old rings.
See Jonathan Scott's excerpts from the Wortley-Montague MSS. vol.
vi. pp. 210 12 This is one of the tales which I have translated
for vol. iv.

[FN#191]  The H. V. adds that Alaeddin loved to ride out a-
hunting and had left the city for eight days whereof three had
passed by.

[FN#192]  Galland makes her say, H⁄ bien folle, veux-tu me dire
pourqoui tu ris? The H. V. renders "Cease, giddy head, why
laughest thou?" and the vulgate "Well, giggler," said the
Princess, etc.

[FN#193]  Nothing can be more improbable than this detail, but
upon such abnormal situations almost all stones, even in our most
modern "Society-novels," depend and the cause is clear--without
them there would be no story. And the modern will, perhaps,
suggest that "the truth was withheld for a higher purpose, for
the working out of certain ends." In the H. V Alaeddin, when
about to go a-hunting, always placed the Lamp high up on the
cornice with all care lest any touch it.

[FN#194]  The H. V. adds, "The Magician, when he saw the Lamp, at
once knew that it must be the one he sought; for he knew that all
things, great and small, appertaining to the palace

[FN#195]  In truly Oriental countries the Wazir is expected to
know everything, and if he fail in this easy duty he may find
himself in sore trouble.

[FN#196]  i.e. must he obeyed.

[FN#197]  We see that "China" was in those days the normal
Oriental "despotism tempered by assassination."

[FN#198]  In the H. V. Alaeddin promises, "if I fail to find and
fetch the Princess, I will myself cut off my head and cast it
before the throne." Hindus are adepts in suicide and this self-
decapitation, which sounds absurd further West, is quite possible
to them.

[FN#199]  In Galland Alaeddin unconsciously rubbed the ring
against un petit roc, to which he clung in order to prevent
falling into the stream. In the H. V. "The bank was high and
difficult of descent and the youth would have rolled down
headlong had he not struck upon a rock two paces from the bottom
and remained hanging over the water. This mishap was of the
happiest for during his fall he struck the stone and rubbed his
ring against it," etc.

[FN#200]  In the H. V. he said, "First save me that I fall not
into the stream and then tell me where is the pavilion thou
builtest for her and who hath removed it."

[FN#201]  Alluding to the preparatory washing, a mere matter of
cleanliness which precedes the formal Wuz∑-ablution.

[FN#202]  In the H. V. the Princess ends with, "I had made this
resolve that should he approach me with the design to win his
wish perforce, I would destroy my life. By day and by night I
abode in fear of him; but now at the sight of thee my heart is
heartened."

[FN#203]  The Fellah had a natural fear of being seen in fine
gear, which all would have supposed to be stolen goods; and
Alaeddin was justified in taking it perforce, because necessitas
non habet legem. See a similar exchange of dress in Spitta-Bey's
"Contes Arabes Modernes," p. 91. In Galland the peasant when
pressed consents; and in the H. V. Alaeddin persuades him by a
gift of money.

[FN#204]  i.e. which would take effect in the shortest time.

[FN#205]  Her modesty was startled by the idea of sitting: at
meat with a strange man and allowing him to make love to her.

[FN#206]  In the text Kid›, pop. for Ka-zﬂlika. In the H. V. the
Magician replies to the honeyed speech of the Princess, "O my
lady, we in Africa have not so gracious customs as the men of
China. This day I have learned of thee a new courtesy which I
shall ever keep in mind."

[FN#207]  Galland makes the Princess poison the Maghrabi, which
is not gallant. The H. V. follows suit and describes the powder
as a mortal poison.

[FN#208]  Contrast this modesty with the usual scene of reunion
after severance, as in the case of Kamar al-Zamﬂn and immodest
Queen Bud∑r, vol. iii. pp. 302-304.

[FN#209]  His dignity forbade him to walk even the length of a
carpet: see vol. vii. for this habit of the Mameluke Beys. When
Harun al-Rashid made his famous pilgrimage afoot from Baghdad to
Meccah (and he was the last of the Caliphs who performed this
rite), the whole way was spread with a "Pﬂ-andﬂz" of carpets and
costly cloths.

[FN#210]  The proverb suggests our "par nobile fratrum," a pair
resembling each other as two halves of a split bean.

[FN#211]  In the H. V. "If the elder Magician was in the East,
the other was in the West; but once a year, by their skill in
geomancy, they had tidings of each other."

[FN#212]  The act was religiously laudable, but to the Eastern,
as to the South European mind, fair play is not a jewel; moreover
the story-teller may insinuate that vengeance would be taken only
by foul and unlawful means--the Black Art, perjury, murder and so
forth

[FN#213]  For this game, a prime favourite in Egypt, see vol. vi.
145, De Sacy (Chrestomathie i. 477) and his authorities Hyde,
Syntagma Dissert. ii. 374, P. Labat, "Memoires du Chev
d'Arvieux," iii. 321; Thevenot, "Voyage du Levant," p. 107, and
Niebuhr, "Voyages," i. 139, Plate 25, fig. H.

[FN#214]  Evidently="(jeu de) dames" (supposed to have been
invented in Paris during the days of the Regency: see Littr⁄);
and, although in certain Eastern places now popular, a term of
European origin. It is not in Galland. According to Ibn Khallikan
(iii. 69) "Nard" = tables, arose with King Ardash›r son of Babuk,
and was therefore called Nardash›r (Nard Ardash›r? ). He designed
it as an image of the world and its people, so the board had
twelve squares to represent the months; the thirty pieces or men
represented the days, and the dice were the emblems of Fate and
Lot.

[FN#215]  i.e. a weaner, a name of good omen for a girl-child:
see vol. vi. 145. The Hindi translator, Totﬂrﬂm Shayyﬂn, calls
her Ham›dah = the Praiseworthy.

[FN#216]  Arab. Kirﬂmﬂt: see vols. ii. 237; iv. 45. The
Necromancer clearly smells a rat holding with Diderot:

          De par le Roi! Defense ﬂ Dieu 
          De faire miracle en ce lieu; 

and the stage properties afterwards found with the holy woman,
such as the gallipot of colouring ointment, justify his
suspicion.

[FN#217]  " 'Ajﬂib" plur. of " 'Aj›b," a common exclamation
amongst the populace. It is used in Persian as well as in Arabic.

[FN#218]  Evidently la force de l'imagination, of which a curious
illustration was given in Paris during the debauched days of the
Second Empire. Before a highly "fashionable" assembly of men
appeared a youth in fleshings who sat down upon a stool, bared
his pudenda and closed his eyes when, by "force of fancy,"
erection and emission took place. But presently it was suspected
and proved that the stool was hollow and admitted from below a
hand whose titillating fingers explained the phenomenon.

[FN#219]  a Moslems are curious about sleeping postures and the
popular saying is:--Lying upon the right side is proper to Kings;
upon the left to Sages, to sleep supine is the position of
Allah's Saints and prone upon the belly is peculiar to the
Devils.

[FN#220]  This " ÊAsﬂ," a staff five to six feet long, is one of
the properties of Moslem Saints and reverends who, imitating that
furious old Puritan, Caliph Omar, make and are allowed to make a
pretty liberal distribution of its caresses.

[FN#221]  i.e. as she was in her own home.

[FN#222]  Arab. "Sul∑k" a Sufistical expression, the road to
salvation, &c.

[FN#223]  In the H. V. her diet consisted of dry bread and
fruits.

[FN#224]  This is the first mention of the windows in the Arabic
MS.

[FN#225]  For this "Roc" of the older writers see vols. v. 122;
vi. 16-49. I may remind the reader that the O. Egyptian "Rokh,"
or "Rukh," by some written "Rekhit," whose ideograph is a
monstrous bird with one claw raised, also denotes pure wise
Spirits, the Magi, &c. I know a man who derives from it our
"rook" = beak and parson.

[FN#226]  In the H. V he takes the Lamp from his bosom, where he
had ever kept it since his misadventure with the African Magician

[FN#227]  Here the mythical Rukh is mixed up with the mysterious
bird S›murgh, for which see vol. x. 117.

[FN#228]  The H. V. adds, "hoping thereby that thou and she and
all the household should fall into perdition."

[FN#229]  Rank mesmerism, which has been practiced in the East
from ages immemorial. In Christendom Santa Guglielma worshipped
at Brunate, "works many miracles, chiefly healing aches of head."
In the H. V. Alaeddin feigns that he is ill and fares to the
Princess with his head tied up.

[FN#230]  Mr. Morier in "The Mirza" (vol. i. 87) says, "Had the
Arabian Nights' Entertainments, with all their singular fertility
of invention and never-ending variety, appeared as a new book in
the present day, translated literally and not adapted to European
taste in the manner attempted in M. Galland's translation, I
doubt whether they would have been tolerated, certainly not read
with the avidity they are, even in